Media
Literacy
Lessons
from the Be Internet Awesome Curriculum
Updated June 2021

Understanding media literacy is more important than ever before.
There probably isn’t a teacher on the planet who isn’t feeling that at least
a little bit, now—because the ways our children are consuming, making and
sharing media have changed so much since we were in their shoes.
So where do we start? With the lessons in this little handbook. They offer the
foundational tools and concepts of literacy for today’s media environment.
You’ll find six activities designed specifically for elementary school students.
They’ll learn about…
• Perspective and how we’re all media makers now, each maker with their
own views and ways of interpreting what they see in media
• Framing—how media makers make choices about what to leave in and
leave out of what they create or share
• Credibility: what it means and how to look for it to spot misinformation
• Deception and manipulation in media so they can spot disinformation online
• Sourcing and representation—why we need to make it a practice to ask,
“Who made this and why?”
Your students will also learn what media makers have always needed to think
about: the impact of their messages. So welcome to a little handbook that
offers something really big: learning how to navigate our media environment
with confidence and competency.

Table of Contents
Media Literacy Lessons
Unit 01 Share with Care

4

Lesson 3 That’s not what I meant!
Lesson 4 Frame it

Unit 02 Don’t Fall for Fake
Lesson 3
Lesson 4
Lesson 5
Lesson 6

13

Is that really true?
Spotting untrustworthy information online
If we were a search engine
Practicing Internet search

Unit 04 It’s Cool to Be Kind
Lesson 5 How words can change the whole picture

35

Unit 01: Be Internet Smart

Share
with Care

Protecting yourself, your information and your privacy online
Media literacy
lesson overview

Lesson 3 That’s not what I meant!
Lesson 4 Frame it

Themes

Teachers and parents understand how digital mistakes can hurt feelings, reputations,
and privacy. But it can be harder to convince kids that a seemingly harmless post today
could be misunderstood tomorrow—let alone in the future and by people they never
thought would see it.

Grades 2-6
Grades 2-6

These activities use concrete examples and thought‑provoking discussions to teach
young learners how to maintain a positive online presence and protect their privacy.

Goals for students

✓
✓
✓
✓

Standards
addressed

ISTE Standards for Educators: 1a, 1b, 2a, 2c, 3b, 3c, 3d, 4b, 4d, 5a, 6a, 6b, 6d, 7a
ISTE Standards for Students: 1c, 1d, 2a, 2b, 2d, 3b, 3d
AASL Learning Standards: I.a.1, I.b.1, I.c.1, I.d.3, I.d.4, II.a.2, II.b.1, II.b.2, II.b.3, II.c.1,
II.c.2, d.2., III.a.1, III.a.2, III.a.3, III.b.1, III.c.1, III.c.2, III.d.1, III.d.2, IV.a.1, IV.a.2, V.a.2,
VI.a.1, VI.a.2, VI.a.3

Share with Care

C
 reate and manage a positive reputation both online and offline.
R
 espect the privacy boundaries of others, even if different from one’s own.
U
 nderstand the potential impact of a mismanaged digital footprint.
A
 sk for adult help when dealing with sticky situations.

4

Share with Care
Vocabulary
Lesson 3
Code: A word or phrase, an image (like a logo or
emoji) or some other symbol or collection of symbols
that represent a certain meaning or message.
Sometimes it’s a secret code that only certain people
understand; often it’s just a symbol that stands for
something almost everybody understands.
Context: Information that surrounds the message or
whatever we’re seeing which helps us understand it.
Context can include the place where the message is,
the time when it appears or who it’s coming from.
Interpret: The way a person understands a message,
or the meaning they get from it
Representation: A picture, symbol or description that
says a lot about (or expresses a truth about) a thing,
a person or a group

Lesson 4
Frame: When you take a photo or video of a
landscape, person or object, the frame is what
defines the section that the viewer can see. The
part you decide to leave outside the frame is what
your viewer won’t be able to see.

5

Share with Care: Lesson 3

That’s not what I meant!
Using only emojis, students create t‑shirts to represent themselves. In the process, they learn that different people
can interpret the same message differently.

Media literacy background for teachers: When we wear t‑shirts featuring corporate logos, sports teams, schools,
musicians, politicians, etc., we are essentially walking billboards. This activity demonstrates that a t‑shirt is both direct
communication and media at the same time and helps students see that screens aren’t the only kind of place where
media can be found.

Goals for students

✓
✓
✓
✓

Letʼs talk


Learn
the importance of asking the question: How might others see this message
differently from me?
Grow awareness of the many visual cues people use to communicate.
See that sharing something online as well as on a t‑shirt is making media.
Learn what “context” and “representation” mean.

Has anyone ever misunderstood something you said, did, wrote or posted online?
Did they get mad or sad, so you had to explain that you didn’t mean what they thought
you meant?
Sometimes when we are communicating, we know what we mean, but the people we
are communicating with don’t understand, especially if we aren’t in the same space.
That’s because people’s experiences affect the way they interpret things like images
and words.
To add to the confusion, there are a lot of messages we communicate without even
knowing it. We tell people who we are—and judge who they are—using cues like our
clothes, our hair style, and even the way we walk or gesture with our hands. This is
called “representation”—expressing something about a thing, person, or group by
using pictures, symbols, style and words.
Here’s an example: If you were online and saw a picture of a person wearing a sports
jersey with a team logo, you would probably think that the person is a fan of that team,
and you’d probably be right. That’s because most of us recognize the design of sports
jerseys—we know that’s sports “code.” So even if we aren’t sure which team is being
represented, we know it’s probably a sports team.
But what if you saw a picture of someone wearing a cheese wedge on top of their
head? What would you think about that person? If you live in Wisconsin or you’re
a football fan, you know that “cheese head” is a nickname for Green Bay Packers
football fans. The person in the picture was using the cheese wedge hat to represent
their support for the Packers.
If you didn’t know the Packers fan “code,” you might think that the cheese hat was part
of a Halloween costume or just plain weird. You might even be tempted to comment on
Continued on the next page →

Share with Care

6

how weird it was. That might make Packer fans mad. To them, your comment is rude
and they might be tempted to respond with a mean comment about you. That makes
you mad, so we end up with a mess of negative comments and hurt feelings.
So how do we make sure other people will understand what we mean when we post
online? One way is to see ourselves as media creators—not just communicators or
players. Every time we create an online profile, text someone, comment in game chat,
or share a picture, we are making media. Like all good media creators, we want to be
thoughtful about the media we make and share by pausing before we post and asking:
“How might someone who is different from me interpret my message?”

Activity

Materials needed:
•H
 andout: “Blank t‑shirt”
(one per student)
•H
 andout: “Emoji grid”
(projected or posted so
everyone can see)
•M
 arkers, colored pencils,
or crayons to draw with
•T
 ape (or a way to display
t‑shirt drawings for a
walkabout)

1. Describe yourself with emojis
To help us think about being skillful media creators, we’re going to decorate t‑shirts.
Using the handout of the blank t‑shirt outline, draw a representation of yourself using
only emojis. You can use one, two, or three emojis, but no more. You can copy emojis
from the grid or invent your own.
2. Show and tell
Pair up and try to guess what the emojis on your partner’s t‑shirt say about them.
Are your guesses accurate or do you have to explain to each other what your emoji
picks mean?
3. Learn about each other
Post the “t‑shirts” around the room so everyone can look at everyone else’s shirt.
Can you accurately match each shirt with its owner?
4. A
 s a class, discuss:
• What made it hard or easy to match shirts with classmates? What did you notice
about the symbols on the shirts that were easy to match? Were some emojis used by
lots of people? Were some used by only one person?
• Did everyone agree on the meaning of every emoji? How can context change the
meaning of the emoji? Look at the emoji of the hands with the two fingers. How do
you know if it means peace, victory, or the number 2? How about the fire emoji? Does
it mean danger/emergency? Really popular or successful (“You’re on fire, dude!”)?
Does the meaning change depending on where it appears (grinning emoji on your
homework might mean that your teacher thinks you did good work but in a text from
a friend it might mean they’re happy or joking)? Does the meaning change depending
on what other emojis it’s with?

Takeaway

7

As media creators, before we post messages or pictures online, it’s a good idea to
pause and ask: “How could someone who is different from me interpret this? Am I
sure they’ll understand what I mean?” Could they take it wrong? And we should ask
ourselves the same things before we post or comment too. “Am I sure I understand
what they mean? How can I know?”

Handout: Lesson 3

Blank t‑shirt

Share with Care

8

Handout: Lesson 3

Emoji grid

9

Share with Care: Lesson 4

Frame it
Media literacy background for teachers: Media are made by people who make choices. The most basic of these are
what to include and exclude. This lesson helps students see themselves as media makers when they decide what to
share online.

Goals for students

✓
✓
✓


Visualize
themselves as media creators.
Understand media makers make choices about what to show and what to keep
outside the frame.
Use the concept of framing to understand the difference between what to make
visible and public and what to keep secure or invisible.

Letʼs talk

Visual media makers control how much information they want to share by framing.
They decide what to include inside the frame (what we can see), and they decide what
stays outside the frame (what’s invisible).

Activity

Run through each activity as a class, then discuss:

Materials needed:
• Index cards and scissors
(one set per student)
•H
 andout: “What’s in
the frame?” or screen
or smartboard with
images projected

1. Framing
All pieces of media are the product of a series of choices by their media makers.
One important choice is what to include and another is what to leave out. When we
take pictures or video, “in” and “out” are separated by a frame.
To see how this works, take your index card and cut a rectangle out of the center to
make your own frame.
Hold the frame at arm’s length and move it slowly toward your face and back out (you
could also try this with the zoom function on a camera). What do you notice about what
you can see inside the frame? How about if you move it side to side? Is there a way to
hold the frame so you can see some of your classmates but not others, or some of the
things on a wall but not others?
When you control the frame, you are the media maker. You have the power to decide
what to include or leave out. What you choose to leave outside the frame is still there
in real life, but people who view the media you made would never be able to see it.

2. Keep it in or leave it out?
Grab a handout, and look at picture 1A. What do you think you’re looking at and how
do you know? Now look at 1B. How does the added information help you get a better
idea of what you’re looking at?

Continued on the next page →

Share with Care

10

Try it again with picture 2A. What do you think is casting the shadow? What’s your
evidence? 2B adds more information. Was your guess correct?
3. Too Much Information (TMI)?
Extra information isn’t always welcome. Sometimes it’s a distraction that takes away
from our ability to enjoy or understand the smaller frame image. Take a look at
example #3 on the handout.
It’s fun to see how things are made sometimes. But what would it be like if every
time you watched a movie, a TV show, or video you weren’t just seeing the small
frame—what if you were also seeing all the cameras, microphones, crew members,
and the edges of the set? Do you think you would enjoy the story as much?

4. You decide
Every time you share something online, you are making media. And like the producers
of a film, video or TV show, you can decide what people will see—what’s inside the
frame and what stays out of sight, outside the frame.

Takeaway

11

As a media maker, you put a “frame” around what you share online so other people see
only what you want them to see.

Handout: Lesson 4

What’s in the frame?

1A

1B

2A

2B

Tiger

3A

Share with Care

3B

12

Unit 02: Be Internet Alert

Don’t Fall
for Fake
Steering clear of scammers, fakers, info that doesn’t help and other Internet stuff that
tries to trick your brain—and learning how to find the good stuff
Media literacy
lesson overview

Lesson 3
Lesson 4
Lesson 5
Lesson 6

Themes

Itʼs important for kids to understand that contacts or content they encounter online
arenʼt necessarily true or reliable, and could involve efforts to trick them or steal their
information, identity or property. Online scams aim to get Internet users of all ages to
respond to fraudulent posts and pitches—sometimes from people pretending to be
someone they know.

Goals for students

✓ U
 nderstand that what people tell you online isn’t necessarily true.
✓ L
 earn how scams work, why they’re a threat, and how to avoid them.
✓ Determine the validity of information and messages online and be wary of
manipulation, unsubstantiated claims, fake offers or prizes and other online scams.

Standards
addressed

ISTE Standards for Educators: 1a, 2c, 3b, 3c, 4b, 5a, 6a, 6d, 7a
ISTE Standards for Students 2016: 1c, 1d, 2b, 2d, 3b, 3d, 7b, 7c
AASL Learning Standards: I.b.1, I.c.1, I.c.2, Ic.3, I.d.3, I.d.4, II.a.1, II.a.2, II.b.1, II.b.2,
II.b.3, II.c.1, II.c.2, II.d.1, II.d.2., III.a.1, III.a.2, III.a.3, III.b.1, III.c.1, III.c.2, III.d.1, III.d.2,
IV.a.1, IV.a.2, IV.b.3, V.a.2, VI.a.1, VI.a.2, VI.a.3

Don’t Fall for Fake

Is that really true?
Spotting untrustworthy information online
If we were a search engine
Practicing Internet search

Grades 2-6
Grades 4-6
Grades 2-6
Grades 2-6

13

Don’t Fall for Fake
Vocabulary
Lesson 3
Credible: Believable; someone who is credible uses
evidence, and you can be confident they are telling
the truth.

Lessons 5 and 6
Clickbait: Content that attracts attention and could
push you to click on a link to a certain site by using
interesting formatting or catchy phrases

Expertise: Special skill or knowledge about a
particular thing; experts have expertise

Keyword: A word directly related to the topic of your
Internet search—one of the words you really need to
do your search because no other word describes your
topic better

Motive: The reason that someone does something;
intention
Source: Someone or something that provides
information
Vlogger: A person who is known for regularly posting
short videos on a blog or social media.

Lesson 4
Deceptive: False; an action or message designed to
fool, trick or lie to someone
Deceptive news: News that intentionally lies or
distorts the truth—the popular name for it these
days is “fake news”
Disinformation: False information intended to trick
or mislead you
Evidence: Facts or examples that prove something
is true or false
Misinformation: False Information
Skeptical: Willing to question claims of truth

14

Query: A keyword, set of keywords or a question you
type into a search window (or box) to find information
online. Sometimes a search takes more than one
query to find what you’re looking for.
Search engine/Internet search: A software program
or “tool” people use to find information—including
locations, photos and videos—on the Web
Search results: A collection of information you get in
a search engine after you type your query and hit the
“Search” or “Send” button

Donʼt Fall for Fake: Lesson 3

Is that really true?
Media literacy background for teachers: In addition to helping students use analytical questions to evaluate source
credibility, we also want them to understand that information comes from lots of places (not just textbooks). So they
need to apply their skills to analyze all types of media. When they get to that point, they’re ready to move on to analyzing
special categories of media, like news or scientific data.
Note: This is a media literacy lesson good for everybody to learn but may be a little over the heads of students in grades
2−3, so see a suggested modification below under “Activity.”

Goals for students

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

Letʼs talk


Identify
the tools you already use to know that information is credible.
Consider how certain things like expertise and motive affect credibility.
Learn 4 questions for evaluating source credibility.
Understand that a source that’s credible on one topic is not necessarily credible
on other topics.
Know that checking multiple sources often helps you see whether information
is credible.

What makes something or someone credible or trustworthy?
Every day you make decisions about what to believe and what not to believe. Was that
video you saw credible? Was it trying to persuade you of something? Is your older
brother telling you the truth or teasing? Is that rumor you heard about a friend true?
What do you do when you’re trying to decide if someone is telling the truth? Do you
already use these clues?:
•	What you know about a person
For example, you know if a classmate is really good at something or has a history of
being truthful or playing practical jokes or being mean, so you can usually tell when
they are serious or joking or lying.
•	What a person knows about you
For example, your parents know what kinds of foods give you a stomachache; the
ads on TV do not, so you follow your parents’ advice about what to eat. The school
librarian knows your interests and what kinds of books you like, so you trust her book
recommendations.
•	Tone of voice and facial expression
For example, you know that your friend means the opposite of the words they say if
they roll their eyes and act snarky while they tell you they had a terrible time at the
new skate park.
•	The situation
For example, when friends are playing around and one teases you about your new
haircut, you know it’s just a joke. But if someone at school says the exact same words
to embarrass you in front of the whole class, it’s an insult.
Continued on the next page →

Don’t Fall for Fake

15

When we hear things from a media source like a video, a person on TV, or website,
we don’t personally know the source and they don’t know us. We may not be sure
about whether to believe them.
Even when someone we know sends us a text there are no clues from facial
expressions or tone of voice, so we might not be sure what they mean. That’s when
we need to ask questions…

Activity

Materials needed:
•H
 andout: “Deciding what’s
credible” (one per student)

Recommended modification for grades 2−3: If you feel your students are ready to
discuss whether a source is credible, complete steps 1 and 2 only.
1. Evaluating sources
If you wanted a recommendation for a great new video game, would you ask your
grandmother? Or, to ask it another way, is your grandmother a credible source for
information on video games? A credible source is one that we can trust to give us
accurate and relevant information.
Make a pro/con list to explain the benefits and drawbacks of asking your grandmother
for video game advice.
Did your list look something like this?
PRO

CON

Grandma loves me and wants me
to be happy

Grandma doesn’t play video games
and doesn’t know much about them

Grandma is pretty good at finding
information when she doesn’t know
the answer herself

Grandma doesn’t know which games
I already have or what types of games
I like

If your list looked like that, you’ve just used two of the most common tools we have
to decide if a source is credible: motive and expertise. “Expertise” is a special skill
or knowledge about a particular thing; experts have expertise. “Motive” is someone’s
intention, the reason they say or do something.
Which item in the list gives you information about grandma’s motives? Which items
say something about her expertise? So is the grandma on this pro/con chart a credible
source for information about which new video game to get? She wouldn’t lie, but it
would probably be better to ask someone who cares about us and who also knows
something about gaming and the types of games we like.

16

We may also know that Dad is a great cook but is clueless about fashion, our coach
knows basketball but not gymnastics, or that Grandma can fix almost any toy but
doesn’t know anything about video games. Just because a person is an expert on
one thing doesn’t make them an expert on everything.

2. Make your own pros and cons list
If this is the first time you have thought about how you use motive and expertise as
clues to decide which information sources are credible, you might want to practice
some more.
Imagine that you want to know how to be a better soccer player. Make pro/con lists
for these choices so you can decide if they’re credible sources:
•	your grandma
•	a blog by a winning high school basketball coach
•	the best player on your team
•	a website that sells soccer shoes and gives advice
•	Videos that teach soccer practice techniques
What do you notice about the strengths and weaknesses of each source?
•	Is there one that knows how to teach, but may not be familiar with soccer skills?
•	Is there one that is a soccer expert but may not know how to teach?
•	Is there one whose advice always seems to include buying something from them?
•	Is there one that knows soccer but doesn’t know you or which skills you need to
work on?
Discuss: Who would be a good source to go to and why do you think so?
Credibility is rarely an all‑or‑nothing call. Most sources have strengths and weaknesses.
That’s why the very best answers often come from asking many sources and comparing
their answers.

3. Steps to consider
Credibility isn’t just about who we believe. It’s also about what we believe. We get
ideas about the world from all sorts of places, not just directly from people. A movie
about a tsunami shows a giant wave—taller than a skyscraper—heading towards people
on shore. Is that what tsunamis really look like? An ad implies that most scientists are
men with crazy hair who wear thick glasses and white lab coats all the time. Is that true?
We can check out any source using the 3 Steps on the Deciding what’s credible
handout. They’re about what we already know about motive and expertise.

Continued on the next page →

Don’t Fall for Fake

17

Step 1: Use common sense
Ask: Is it logical—does it make sense?
If a) what you’re seeing doesn’t make sense, b) you know it isn’t true from your own
experience, or c) it just doesn’t work with facts you already know, you don’t have to
take any additional steps. You are looking at a source that is not credible.
Step 2: Ask questions
Not just any questions, but these four:
Expertise
a) Does this source know me or care about me?
The answer to this question depends on the information you’re looking for. If you’re
checking some information about plastic water bottles polluting the ocean, it really
doesn’t matter if the source knows you or not. But if a site promises that you will love
their new toy, it would need to know what kinds of toys, games, or activities you like
for their promise to be credible.
b) Does this source know a lot about this topic? How did they learn what they know?
Some people think that the easiest way to find credible information is to ask a digital
voice assistant. Digital assistants seem to know everything! Did you ever wonder
how they can know all those answers? They use mathematical calculations (called
“algorithms”) to find answers.
For simple questions that only have one possible answer (like the temperature
outside or the name of a celebrity famous for singing a particular pop song) they
are usually a credible source. But if the question is complicated, it would be better
to start with people or groups who have lots of experience or have earned awards
or PhDs related to your topic. Then you can use a voice assistant to confirm that
information (see Step 3).

Motive
c) What does this source want me to do or believe and why would they want me to do
or believe that?
Does the source make money if you follow their advice? For example, do you think
an influencer earns a fee if you buy the product they’re wearing or talking about?
Does a professional athlete wear a certain brand of shoe or shirt just because they
like that brand or because they’re paid to talk about it?
Money can often be one reason why you’re seeing a logo or brand name in a video
or ad—it can affect what the influencer or athlete is telling you (and what they’re
not telling you). They probably don’t intend to hurt you, but it’s possible that making
money is more important to them than giving you all the facts or saying what is
good for you.

18

d) Who benefits and who might be hurt if people believe this source?
This isn’t always easy to tell. Here’s an example:
Imagine an ad for an app that promises to make you a better student.
•W
 hat are the possible benefits? The app maker would benefit if you buy the app
because they would make money. And you might benefit if the app really helped
you.
•W
 ho might be hurt if you believed the ad? You might be wasting your money if
you bought the app. You might also be spending time practicing the wrong things,
and then actually do worse in school. Or you might rely on the app, which can only
make guesses about what you need, instead of seeking help from your teacher,
who actually knows what you need.

Step 3: Confirm
Ask: Do other credible sources back up what this source says?
The job isn’t just to check more sources. It’s to look for a variety of sources. If you
can’t find a variety of credible sources that agree with the source you are checking,
you shouldn’t believe that source.
4. Check your sources
Now that you understand, it’s time to practice. Pick a question related to something
you are covering in class or something you have seen online. Find a source that
provides an answer to that question and, in small groups, use the questions on the
handout to decide if the source is credible.
If you need some ideas, here you go:
•	You need ideas for a birthday present for your friend. An ad for a local store claims
their search tool, which has every item offered by the store, can help you find a gift
for anyone on your list. Does that work for you?
•	You are reading online reviews of a new pizza place and notice that three of the six
5‑star reviews are from people with the same last name as the restaurant. Two
others say it is the best pizza on the planet and one says it was not bad for a cheap
slice. There are also fourteen negative comments. Would the positive reviews
convince you to try their pizza?
•	A pop up ad says that you are part of a very small group that has been selected to try
a special “mermaid pill” that will give you the power to breathe underwater without
scuba gear. All you have to do is send $9.99 to cover shipping. Would you do it?
•	You like a lot of the videos by a popular vlogger because they’re funny, but they also
say nasty things that you don’t like about minority groups. Do you buy what they say
because they’re funny and really popular? Do you think that influences people?

Takeaway

Don’t Fall for Fake

Questions are our friends. When you ask good questions about sources and the
information they provide, you’ll get much better information. The more sources you
use, the better. And remember that a great source for one subject doesn’t mean it’s
great for everything.
19

Handout: Lesson 3

Deciding what’s credible
Helpful steps to identify credible from non-credible sources.

Step 1

Use common sense
Is it logical?

Step 2

Ask questions
Not just any questions, but these four:
Expertise
•	Does this source know me or care about me (and does that matter)?
•	Does this source know a lot about this topic? How did they learn what they know?
Motive
•	What does this source want me to do or believe and why would they want me to do
or believe that?
•	Who benefits and who might be hurt if people believe this source?

Step 3

20

Confirm
Do other credible sources back up what this source says? Use online search—or work
with your school media specialist in the library—to find other sources of information
about your subject (the sources could be book or news or magazine articles, online or
offline). Go through Steps 1 and 2 with them too—ask the same questions about these
sources too. If they’re giving you the same information about your subject, it’s pretty
likely they’re confirming that your source is credible.

Donʼt Fall for Fake: Lesson 4

Spotting untrustworthy information online
Media literacy background for teachers: Media literacy questions and observation techniques give students tools to
navigate their way through disinformation without getting stuck in arguments or hurting relationships with friends and
family. But they need to ask questions and get used to applying critical inquiry to information that comes their way.

Goals for students

✓
✓
✓
✓

Letʼs talk

I dentify clues which indicate that a news or information source is deceptive.
Use analytical questions and careful observation to evaluate source credibility.
Understand the importance of checking a source’s credibility before sharing their
message.
Develop the habit of analyzing all news and information, not just the stories we
think are suspicious.

Did you ever play one of those games where you hunt for mistakes hidden in a picture?
Sometimes dealing with news is like that. There are a lot of people and groups who are
so passionate about what they believe that they twist the truth to get us to agree with
them. When their twisting is disguised as a news story, that’s disinformation.
Some people don’t learn how to spot fake information, but they share it anyway. That’s
how it spreads. And when people make choices about the things they do or believe
based on that disinformation, it can get really hard for people to listen to each other
calmly, argue respectfully, understand each other better, and solve problems.
So, if something looks or sounds like news, how can we tell the difference between
what’s real or credible and what’s fake or misleading? There are clues we can learn to
spot it—tricks used by people who are trying to mislead you. And there are questions
we can ask that help us spot stories that aren’t based on facts.

Continued on the next page →

Don’t Fall for Fake

21

Activity

1. What’s wrong with this picture?
Take a look at the image below. Look carefully. Can you spot the differences between
the two pictures?

Materials needed:
• Image: “What’s Wrong
with this picture”
• Handout: “Deciding
what’s credible” from
Lesson 3 (page 54)
• Worksheet: “Spotting
phony URLs”
Answers for worksheet:
“Spotting phony URLs”
Real:
abcnews.go.com
bbc.com/news
nbcnews.com
nytimes.com
washingtonpost.com
usatoday.com
Fake:
abcnews.com.co
abcnews‑us.com
nbc.com.co
nytimesofficial.com
bbc1.site/business‑news
washinqtonpost.com
washingtonpost.com.co
usatosday.com

What if someone told you where to look? Would that make it easier?

22

There are 9 differences, did you spot them all?

Trying to tell if a news story is real or fake is sort of like this picture game. By looking
really carefully, you can find important information. And it’s a lot easier if you know
what to look for.
So here are some clues to finding disinformation. If you spot these things, you are
probably looking at a fake, or deceptive, story.

Spotting phony URL’s Handout
The first thing to look at is the URL (web address) for the site that published the story.
Some fake sites try to fool you by choosing names that mimic a real site but with small
differences. Most companies use short URLs because they are easier to remember and
type, so URLs with added, unnecessary letters are often sites with false information.
Look at the handout:
• Circle all of the URLs that you think are real.
• When everyone is done, look at the answer key. Did you get them all right?
How could you check to see if a URL was a real news site? One way is to do a web
search for the news organization or the URL. If the organization is credible a box can
appear to the right of the search results on many platforms with a description of the
organization, including their website address. If the URL isn’t credible, you will often be
able to scroll down and see headlines about the site being reported as a fake—or you’ll
find out the site isn’t available anymore.

Continued on the next page →

Don’t Fall for Fake

23

2. Inspecting headlines
Sometimes someone shares a news story without a URL. In those cases, here are
some clues to use:
a) A
 story starts with a picture of something that would interest us, like a cute dog,
a celebrity, or an unusual stunt. But when we click, the story has little or nothing to
do with the picture.
b) Instead of letting you decide for yourself, people who are trying to convince you
to agree with them sometimes use things like boldface, ALL CAPS, underlining,
or exclamation points to get you to think what you’re seeing is important and click
on them, called clickbait. Real journalists don’t use those techniques.
c) To get you to read a story, some people include words in the headline like “shocking”
or “outrageous” or “surprising.” They know words like that make us curious. But real
journalists let the news speak for itself. They tell the story and let us decide if it is
shocking or surprising.
For example, look at this picture and headline:

The shocking truth about what
teachers do after school
Without reading ahead, what do you imagine the story is going to say? Why do you think
that? What’s your evidence?

24

Here’s the story:
“A recent State University survey of teachers found that 86% of teachers do what
everyone does after work. They run errands, fix dinner, spend time with family, do
household chores, and get ready for the next day. But lately, many teachers have
been doing something unexpected.
A decade ago, economic troubles led many states to slash education budgets. That
meant years without a pay raise for teachers. Unable to meet basic expenses on low
salaries, many teachers now work second jobs. In some states teachers have even
gone on strike for pay increases so they can quit second jobs and devote more time
to their students.”
Was the story what you thought it would be? Do you think that the picture and headline
were accurate or misleading? What’s your evidence?

3. Inspecting sources
When we analyze news, clues can be helpful, but they aren’t always enough. Sometimes
trustworthy news stories use techniques to attract our attention, and that can make
them seem fake. And sometimes fake sources are so good at copying the real thing
that it’s hard to tell they’re not. It’s hard to tell them apart. For example…
Do these sound like trustworthy news organizations to you?:
American News
National Review
News Examiner
World News Daily Report
Weekly World News
NewsWatch33
Actually, only National Review is real. How could you find that out? You could start by
doing a Web search of the organization’s name. See where the name appears besides
the organization’s own website. If it appears in Wikipedia or an article at a newspaper
or news magazine’s site, it’s probably a credible organization. But see what those
articles say about it! It’s possible that they’re all saying it’s fake.
Find a story about your school, community, the latest diet fad, or anything in the news
that interests you. Use the 3 Steps on the Deciding what’s credible handout, along with
the new clues you know, to decide if the story is real or deceptive.

Continued on the next page →

Don’t Fall for Fake

25

Step 1: Use common sense
Ask: Is it logical—does it make sense?
Sometimes it’s obvious. If you see a headline like: CELEBRITY HAS SECRET BABY
WITH SPACE ALIEN, logic probably tells you it isn’t real.
Sometimes it isn’t so obvious. If:
a) what you’re seeing doesn’t make sense
b) you know it isn’t true from your own experience, or
c) it just doesn’t work with facts your already know
…you are looking at a source that is probably fake news.

Step 2: Ask the expertise and motive questions
(see pages 52 and 53)
Step 3: Confirm
Ask: Do other credible sources back up what this source says?
Who else is reporting this story? (You can use Internet search to see if this story is
covered by other news sources…) What other stories does the site include? Are they
all from the same perspective or are there many views included? If you can’t find a
variety of reliable sources that are covering the story, you should be skeptical of
that source.

Takeaway

26

Now that you know how to use clues and questions to spot disinformation, you can
ask smart questions and make careful observation part of your daily routine and
with time, you’ll be an expert in spotting fake stuff online. You now know how to
analyze the information you get online. It’s called critical thinking, and it’s a media
user’s superpower.

Worksheet: Lesson 4

Spotting phony URLs
Real or fake?

usatoday.com

Real

Fake

abcnews.com.co

Real

Fake

washinqtonpost.com

Real

Fake

abcnews‑us.com

Real

Fake

bbc.com/news

Real

Fake

abcnews.go.com

Real

Fake

nytimesofficial.com

Real

Fake

nbc.com.co

Real

Fake

washingtonpost.com

Real

Fake

nytimes.com

Real

Fake

washingtonpost.com.co

Real

Fake

bbc1.site/business‑news

Real

Fake

nbcnews.com

Real

Fake

usatosday.com

Real

Fake

Circle the correct answer.

Don’t Fall for Fake

27

Donʼt Fall for Fake: Lesson 5

If we were a search engine
Without using any technology (we’ll do that in the next activity), students create “search results” together to start
learning how Internet search works from the “inside out.”

Goals for students

✓
✓
✓

Letʼs talk

What is search?
The internet is a place that has a gazillion (well, billions and billions of) pieces of
information. Internet search, sometimes called a search engine, helps us narrow down
that crazy amount of information that comes from all over the world. It’s a software
tool that people use to find information on all kinds of topics.

 earn fundamentals of online search.
L
Search for information about a topic.
Understand that search results are collections of information, not usually answers
to a question.

You might already know that, to use this tool, you type a few key words about a topic
you want to know more about into the search bar (the empty box on a search engine
page) or in your browser window (where you also type web addresses). Then, when
you’re ready, you hit the Return or Search key, and—voila!—the search engine works its
magic (in about a half second), and you get your search results. Ok, so it’s not actually
magic. Internet search uses algorithms, which is a fancy way of saying people at the
search company taught the software how to find and turn up information for you. Don’t
worry about how algorithms work for now. You just need to know that Search does the
“searching” for you.
It’s also good to know that search results aren’t necessarily answers to a question.
They’re just collections of information you’re interested in or looking for. If you do have
a question that you’re taking to a search engine, you can often find an answer in your
search results, but sometimes it takes a few queries to get to the answer you’re looking
for. That’s called “refining” your search.
So let’s practice how search works by pretending to be a search engine together…

Activity

1. Organize students into groups of 2.
2. Distribute a copy of the worksheet to each student.
3. S
 hare a search topic with the class. Here are some possibilities:

Materials needed:
•W
 orksheet: “If we were
a search engine” (one
per student)

28

• pizza
• tornado
• airplane

• solar system
• farmer
• soccer

• volcanoes
• cooking
• sharks

• basketball
• dentist
• construction

4. Students work with their partners to create possible “search results” in each
category on the handout: “Website,” “Image,” “Map” and “Video.” Their results can be
in the form of words or drawings, as appropriate.
Encourage students to be creative, and make sure they know there are no “wrong”
answers. For example, if the topic is “sharks,” students might brainstorm the following
search results:
•	Website: information about different kinds of sharks
•	Image: a drawing of a shark
•	Video: sharks swimming through the ocean
•	Map: the location of a beach where people saw a shark
5. When students finish all four search result categories for the given topic, pick which
category (website, image, video or map) to talk about as a class.
6. Have one student from each pair share out their example of one of the search
results.
For example, let’s say the topic is “pizza.” You can decide to have each group share
their image results for pizza. Students can hold up their drawing and explain what they
created. This allows students to see all the different search results that can be generated
from a single query.
7. After students share examples, ask the class the following discussion questions:
•	About how many different results did we have?
•	About how many results were similar?
•	If I changed my topic to
, how do you think that would change your
results? For example, if the search topic was “pizza,” how would the results change if
I changed my query to “pepperoni pizza”?
Suggestion: Complete 4 rounds in total…
•	Choose a different topic from each round and repeat the same steps as listed above.
•	Complete 4 rounds so you can have discussions about the 4 main types of search
results.

Takeaway

Don’t Fall for Fake

Internet search is a tool you can use to find information online. The info can be in the
form of text on a website, videos, images, maps and more. The key words you type into
a search engine determine what results you get.

29

Worksheet: Lesson 5

If we were a search engine
Search Topic

Image | Video | Map

30

Website

Donʼt Fall for Fake: Lesson 6

Practicing Internet search
Using an Internet connection, students explore using a search engine and practice creating ever more effective
search queries.

Goals for students

✓
✓
✓
✓

Letʼs talk

Search is a tool that helps you find information on the internet. To use search, you can
go to a search engine and type a query—a question or keywords—into the search bar
to get info on a topic you want to know more about. Sometimes using keywords works
better than just asking a question. That’s because, first, the words you use in your query
and, second, the order you put them in are really important. If you just ask a question,
it may not have the words and the order that help the search engine turn up the results
you’re looking for. But—no worries—it’s perfectly fine to start with a question if you like.


Navigate
a search engine.
Practice searching for information about a topic.
Create search queries.
Change keywords and notice differences in search results.

The important thing is, just start, because lots of times it takes more than one query to
get to the information you want. So type your question into the search engine, look at
the search results and—if they’re not good enough—you can use those results to guide
you on how to create a better query and get even closer to what you’re looking for.
For example: Let’s say I want to start a garden. I want to grow vegetables I can use to
cook in my kitchen.
• I have no idea how to do this, so I’m going to do an Internet search to find out how.
I go to a search engine and type in the question, “How do I start a garden?”
Display your computer screen so students can see you searching.
• Ok, let’s take a look at these results.
Review the results with your class. Be sure to point out that there are websites, images,
videos and other types of results. Also point out search results that are not relevant to
helping you grow a garden for vegetables and spices for cooking.
• I’m noticing that a lot of these results are about all kinds of gardens, but I need
information about creating a garden at home, in my own yard. Also, I only want
to grow stuff I can eat. I should probably include a keyword about vegetables, right?
Ok, let’s try searching this: “home garden vegetables”.
Display your computer screen so students can see you searching.
• Take a look at these results. What do you notice?
Allow the students to share what they notice in the search results.
 oth sets of search results gave me information about starting a garden, right? But
B
the first set was about all kinds of gardens. It showed me I had to add a couple of
important keywords to my original query to get the search results I needed to learn
how to start a garden for cooking (BTW, did you know that’s called a “kitchen garden”?).
Continued on the next page →

Don’t Fall for Fake

31

The more you practice creating search queries, the easier search gets. You can
always start with a question, and if you don’t get your answer, the search results will
give you keywords you can try to get closer to what you need to know. If you want
to start with keywords and aren’t sure which ones to use, just know that there are
no wrong keywords. Just try some! You can always try a different query if you’re not
seeing the results you were hoping for. Let’s try it out…

Activity

Materials needed:
• Worksheet: “Practicing
Internet search” (one per
student)
• Internet‑connected device

1. Create the first search query
Explain to students that they are going to explore using a search engine and practice
creating search queries. On the handout, they’ll find four different characters, each
character thinking (in a thought bubble) about something they want to learn more
about. Then have your students…
•	Type the original search query (provided on the handout) into the search engine,
and explore the search results.
•	Record 4−5 search results on their handout.
2. Create their own (second) search query
Have students look again at what the character wants to know (in the thought bubble).
Ask students, did the original search results give enough information relevant to this
topic?
•	Direct students to change the original query to include keywords that will get them
more useful search results.
Hint: Students can look for keywords they found in the first search results or in the
character’s thought bubble.
•	Have them type this second search query into the search engine and explore the
search results.
•	Have students record 4−5 results on their handout.
3. Discuss
Have students find a partner and ask them to share with their partners how they
changed the original search query and the types of results they got from that revised
search query. Ask them to share what they discovered in a brief class discussion.
4. Repeat Steps 1−3 for the remaining characters

Takeaway

32

The more you practice creating search queries, the easier it will get to find the
information you are looking for in a search engine.

Worksheet: Lesson 6

Practicing Internet search
Original search query
Books about imaginary characters and mystery
I’m looking for a book to read.
I love mysteries! I also enjoy reading books that

Search results

have imaginary characters that live in the future.
I think my teacher calls that sci-fi.

Revised search query

Search results

I want to make a cake for my sister’s birthday.
She doesn’t like chocolate but loves fruit.

Original search query
No chocolate cake with fruit
Search results

I wonder what kind of cake I can make.

Revised search query

Search results

Continued on the next page →

Don’t Fall for Fake

33

Original search query
Video game jobs
Search results

I love playing video games.
I wonder what it would be like if I grew up
and worked for a video gaming company.
It would be so cool if that was my job someday!

Revised search query

Search results

Original search query
What do I need to fish?
Search results

My cousin invited me to go fishing.
I have never fished before so I don’t know
what kind of equipment I need to bring with me.

Revised search query

Search results

34

Unit 04: Be Internet Kind

It’s Cool to
Be Kind
Learning and practicing the power of online kindness
Media literacy
lesson overview

Lesson 5 How words can change the whole picture

Themes

The digital world creates new challenges and opportunities for social interaction,
for kids and all the rest of us. Social cues can be harder to read online, constant
connecting can bring both comfort and anxiety, and anonymity can fuel crushes
and compliments as well as harm to ourselves and others.

Grades 2-6

It’s complicated, but we know that the Internet can amplify kindness as well as
negativity. Learning to express kindness and empathy—and how to respond to
negativity and harassment—is essential for building healthy relationships and
reducing bullying, depression, academic struggles and other problems.
Research shows that, rather than simply telling kids not to be negative online, two
kinds of teaching can help address the underlying causes of negative behaviors:
social‑emotional learning and bullying prevention. These activities don’t replace
evidence‑based programs; they lay a great foundation, encouraging students to
interact positively and deal with negativity from the start.

Goals for students

✓ D
 efine what being positive means and looks like, online and offline.
✓ L
 ead with positivity in online communications.
✓ I dentify situations in which a trusted adult should be consulted.

Standards
addressed

ISTE Standards for Educators: 1a, 1c, 2c, 3a, 3b, 3c, 4b, 5a, 5b, 6a, 6b, 6d, 7a
ISTE Standards for Students 2016: 1c, 2b, 3d, 4d, 7a, 7b, 7c
AASL Learning Standards: I.a.1, I.a.2, I.b.1, I.b.2, I.b.3, I.c.1, I.c.2, I.c.3, I.d.3, I.d.4, II.a.1,
II.a.2, II.b.1, II.b.2, II.b.3, II.c.1, II.c.2, II.d.1, II.d.2, II.d.3, III.a.1, III.a.2, III.a.3, III.b.1, III.b.2,
III.c.1, III.c.2, III.d.1, III.d.2, IV.b.2, IV.b.3, IV.d.2, V.a.2, V.a.3, V.c.1, V.c.3, V.d.1, V.d.2, V.d.3,
VI.a.1, VI.a.2, VI.d.1, VI.d.3

It’s Cool to Be Kind

35

It’s Cool to Be Kind
Vocabulary
Lesson 5
Bullying: Purposefully mean behavior that is usually
repeated. The person being targeted often has a
hard time defending him or herself.
Cyberbullying: Bullying that happens online or
through using digital devices
Harassment: A more general term than bullying
that can take many forms—pestering, annoying,
intimidating, humiliating, etc.—and can happen
online too

36

Itʼs Cool to Be Kind: Lesson 5

How words can change the whole picture
Media literacy background for teachers: This lesson lays a foundation for elementary grade students by asking them
to grapple with simple captions about individual people. In developmentally appropriate ways, this lesson covers these
media literacy concepts and questions:
1. Knowing that all media are “constructed”—made by people who make choices about what to include and how to
present it.
2. Routinely asking “Who made this and why?”
3. Routinely reflecting on the media we create by asking: “How might this message affect others?”

Goals for students

✓
✓
✓
✓
✓

 earn that we make meaning from the combination of pictures and words.
L
Understand how a caption can change what we think a picture is communicating.
Begin to see the power of your words, especially when combined with pictures
you post.
Understand how to be a responsible media maker.
Develop the habit of asking, “Who posted this and why?”

Letʼs talk

How can words change a picture?!
Pictures combined with words are a powerful way to communicate. Imagine a news
photo of a house on fire. One caption says “Family loses house but everyone gets out
safely, including the dog.” That would be sad, and maybe a little scary, right? But what
if the caption said, “Firefighters set empty house on fire so they could practice using
new firefighting tools.” You’re still looking at a house on fire, but you have a very
different idea about what’s happening. You might even feel safe instead of scared.

Activity

Divide the class into small groups. Without revealing to students that you’re handing out
two different versions, give half the groups the handout with the positive caption and the
other half the one with the negative caption.

Materials needed:
• See following page

1. Pictures + words
Take a look at the image. With your group, describe the person in the picture. What sort
of person do you think they are? Do you think you’d like to spend time with them or be
their teammate? Why or why not?
The evidence will quickly reveal that groups were looking at pictures with different
captions. Have each group hold up their picture so the others can see the difference.
Finally, briefly discuss: What does this show about the power of words to shape our
ideas?

2. Still not sure?
Take a look at some more examples (see How words can change a picture)…

Continued on the next page →

It’s Cool to Be Kind

37

Materials needed:
•P
 ictures of teachers and
staff from your school going
through their daily routines.
For 2−3 weeks prior to the
activity, you’ll want to gather
a few digital photos, or assign
the students to gather them
without revealing the pictures’
role in this activity (always
with the subjects’ permission,
of course).
If that isn’t possible, you
could gather age‑appropriate
pictures from magazines or
news sources.
•O
 ptional: At least one picture
of every student in the class
• Handout: “Sports images”
•H
 andout: “How words can
change a picture”

Think about what it would feel like to get or see a message that included one of the
pictures with the negative caption. Seeing or hearing negative messages doesn’t
only hurt the person in the picture. It can make other people who see the picture
uncomfortable too.
When you get the message or photo, what do you do? You always have a choice.
You can…
•	Choose not to share the picture with anyone else, or…
•	Tell the sender that you would rather not get messages that are meant to hurt
someone, or…
•	Support the person in the picture by letting them know that you know it isn’t true, or…
•	All the above.
You could also send a positive message. Not an answer—just your own positive
message. Seeing or hearing positive messages supports the person in the picture
and can make others feel good and want to post their own positive messages.

3. Someone at our school
Teacher selects random photo from shuffled set of school staff photos.
Practice creating different kinds of captions. First make up some captions that would
make the person in the photo feel happy or proud. How many different captions can
you think up?
Now let’s talk about funny captions. Is there a difference between writing what’s
funny to you and what might be funny to the person in the photo? Is there a difference
between a joke that’s kind and funny to everyone, and a joke that makes fun of
someone and is only “funny” to a few people?
Write some captions that are examples of what we discussed, then let’s all pick a caption
for each photo that’s both funny and kind—not hurtful to the person in the photo.
Keep practicing using pictures of other people at our school. Did you get any new ideas
about kind things to say by looking at the captions that your classmates wrote?

4. Class collage
Create a collage of pictures of every person in your class, each with a kind caption
written on it.

Takeaway

38

Captions can change what we think—and feel—about a picture and the messages
we think we’re getting. It’s good to think or pause before posting pictures with captions,
to consider how the whole thing might make others feel. And before accepting pictures
and captions that others post, ask, “Who posted this and why?”

Extension

It’s Cool to Be Kind

Try this experiment. Distribute a short comic strip in which all the words have been
deleted. Then have every student, working individually, fill in the thought/conversation
bubbles to tell the story they see. Compare the results. Did everyone see the same story
or write the same words? Why not? What does the experiment show about how we use
words to provide context or understand what a picture’s “saying”?

39

Handout: Lesson 5

Sports images

Awesome!

Show Off!

Awesome!

Show Off!

40

Handout: Lesson 5

How words can change a picture

Original artwork wins
first place.

Hot Mess.

I discovered a new species
in the world!

Mmm Dinner!

Nailed it!

Awkward - not even close!

Youngest scientist in
the world!

Nerding out. #lame

Finally, my own phone!

Got my mom’s lame
old phone. :/

Grew my hair out and
donated it to a cancer
patient. <3

WORST. HAIRCUT. EVER!

It’s Cool to Be Kind

41

g.co/BeInternetAwesome

© 2021 Google Inc.

