Clean Heat and Power Using Biomass
Gasification for Industrial and Agricultural
Projects
February 2010
Prepared by:
Carolyn J. Roos, Ph.D.
WSU Extension Energy Program
P.O. Box 43165 • Olympia, WA 98504-3165
(360) 956-2004 • Fax (360) 236-2004 • TDD (360) 956-2218

WSUEEP08-033 Rev. 5, 2010

Cooperating agencies: Washington State University Extension Energy Program,
U.S. Department of Energy, Alaska Energy Authority, Idaho Office of Energy
Resources, Montana Department of Environmental Quality Energy Program, and
Oregon Department of Energy

blank

About the Author
Carolyn Roos, Ph.D., is a mechanical engineer with the Washington State University
Extension Energy Program. She provides technical support to the Northwest Clean
Energy Application Center with a focus on clean heat and power (CHP), waste heat
recovery, district heating, and biopower/gasification CHP applications. She has
experience in building systems‘ energy efficiency, mechanical design in hydroelectric
facilities, and solar thermal applications. Carolyn provides technical assistance to
commercial and industrial clients on energy system efficiency topics. She can be
contacted by email at roosc@energy.wsu.edu.

Acknowledgements
This study was funded by the Northwest Clean Energy Application Center with support
funding from the U.S. Department of Energy‘s Industrial Technologies Program and
from the State of Washington.

Disclaimer
While the information included in this guide may be used to begin a preliminary analysis,
a professional engineer and other professionals with experience in biomass drying should
be consulted for the design of a particular project.
Neither the Northwest Clean Energy Application Center nor its cooperating agencies, nor
any of their employees, makes any warranty, express or implied, or assumes any legal
liability or responsibility for the accuracy, completeness or usefulness of any information,
apparatus, product, or process disclosed, or represents that its use would not infringe
privately owned rights. Reference herein to any specific commercial product, process, or
service by trade name, trademark, manufacturer, or otherwise does not necessarily
constitute or imply its endorsement, recommendation, or favoring by the Northwest
Clean Energy Application Center or its cooperating agencies.

i

Executive Summary
The use of biomass to generate heat power, fuels and chemicals is crucial in achieving
energy independence and increasing our use of renewable energy sources. In our
transition to renewable energy, gasification promises to play a major role in large part
because its products can make use of existing infrastructure and equipment associated
with fossil fuel use. This guidebook is intended for use by the forest products and food
processing industries. It can also be used by farmers, ranchers and others who have
access to biomass materials.
Gasification is a thermal conversion process in which both heat and a combustible
product gas are produced. Combustion, in contrast, produces only heat, most commonly
in a boiler to generate steam for production of electricity using a steam turbine. With
gasification, generation of a combustible gas is key to its importance. A gaseous fuel
makes the use of reciprocating engines, gas turbines and fuels cells possible in the
generation of electricity, thereby increasing electrical efficiency. Gasification also makes
possible a highly efficient configuration for generating electricity, referred to as an
integrated gasification combined cycle (IGCC). Further, gasification can facilitate the
use of biomass for heat and power because gaseous fuels can be distributed by pipeline
from a gasification plant for use in other locations, either on site or off.
Gasification of biomass and the use of the product gas in boilers and furnaces have a long
and proven history. However, using the product gas for efficient electricity generation
with engines, turbines and fuel cells has been hampered until recently by technical
difficulties in removing tars from the product gas. Tar removal technologies have
advanced in recent years and have now been successfully demonstrated and proven
reliable. With these advances, biomass gasification for generation of heat and power has
now emerged into commercialization. In the U.S., construction will begin in 2009 on a
42 MWe commercial-scale project in Tallahassee, Florida, and another 28 MWe gasifier
is planned for Forsythe, Georgia. Around the world, more than 100 biomass gasifier
projects are operating or ordered.
In addition to heat and power, there is a wide array of co-products possible with
gasification. This can improve the cost effectiveness of a gasification project. The
product gas can be used as a feedstock to produce hydrogen and liquid hydrocarbons,
such as ethanol, diesel and chemical feedstocks. Biochar has several potential markets
and also gives gasification the potential of a carbon neutral or carbon negative energy
solution. Both combustion and gasification produce ash, which also can be marketed.
This guide is a practical overview of gasification on the small (<1 MW) and medium
scales appropriate for food processors, farmers, forest products industries and others with
access to biomass materials. The selection and application of gasifiers, engines and
turbines, feedstock preparation and handling equipment, gas clean up technologies, and
other ancillary equipment are discussed. Practical strategies for avoiding slagging,
fouling and corrosion in the gasifier and downstream equipment are discussed.
ii

Contents
About the Author .................................................................................................... i
Acknowledgements ................................................................................................ i
Disclaimer .............................................................................................................. i
Executive Summary .............................................................................................. ii
Introduction ........................................................................................................... 1
What is Gasification? ............................................................................................ 3
Why Gasification? ................................................................................................. 4
Comparison with Other Thermal Conversion Processes ...................................... 6
System Equipment ................................................................................................ 9
Product Gas Composition ................................................................................... 23
Feedstock Characteristics and Requirements .................................................... 24
Reducing Slagging, Fouling and Corrosion ......................................................... 29
Gas Clean-Up ..................................................................................................... 32
Marketable Co-Products ..................................................................................... 35
Environmental Benefits ....................................................................................... 39
Industry Applications ........................................................................................... 41
Demonstration Projects ....................................................................................... 42
Other Information Resources .............................................................................. 52
References ......................................................................................................... 55

iii

List of Tables
Table 1. Summary of Bioenergy Conversion Technologies ................................. 2
Table 2. Comparison of Combustion, Gasification and Pyrolysis ......................... 8
Table 3. Predominant Components of Products from Fast Pyrolysis and
Gasification .......................................................................................... 8
Table 4. Summary of Selected Biomass Gasifier Types .................................... 15
Table 5. Typical Energy Contents of Producer Gas, Syngas and Natural Gas .. 23
Table 6. Typical Heating Value, Moisture Content and Ash Content of Selected
Biomass Feedstocks .......................................................................... 26
Table 7. Characteristics of Common Biomass Feedstocks ................................ 27
Table 8. Chemical Contents of Product Gas from Selected Biomass Fuels ...... 27
Table 9. Biomass Characteristics As Compared to Coal ................................... 28
Table 10. Typical Tar and Particulate Contents of Gasifier Types ..................... 34
Table 11. Tolerance of End-Use Devices for Tar*.............................................. 34
Table 12. Examples of European Biomass Gasification Projects....................... 47
Table 13. Examples of North American Biomass Gasification Projects ............. 49

List of Figures
Figure 1. Updraft and Downdraft Fixed-Bed Gasifiers* ...................................... 11

iv

Introduction
Biomass feedstocks are becoming increasingly valuable as the demand for renewable
fuels has increased and the supply of wood fuels has diminished with the decline in the
housing market. Bark, wood chips, and shavings, once considered waste and disposal
problems, are now commodities with demand coming from domestic forest products
companies, as well as European markets. Other biomass residuals, such as food
processing and agricultural wastes, are increasingly being looked upon as fuel sources.
As cellulosic ethanol production emerges into commercialization, demand for wood and
agricultural residuals will only increase. These trends will likely continue as a whole
range of new technologies and uses, summarized in Table 1, are added to traditional
technologies and uses.
Volatile prices for conventional energy sources have significantly changed the economics
of efficiently using our biomass resources. With rising electricity prices and increasing
demand for renewable energy, base load biomass-fired clean heat and power1 (CHP)
systems become more attractive. It is now more important than ever that we use our
biomass resources efficiently.
Biomass gasification can achieve higher efficiencies in generating electricity and lower
emissions compared to combustion technologies. Further, gasification increases the
possible uses of biomass since the product gas has value not just as a fuel in itself, but
also as a feedstock to produce other fuels, such as ethanol and hydrogen, and as a
chemical feedstock.
Biomass gasification has trailed coal gasification due to technical differences deriving
from the characteristics of the feedstocks, as well as the typical scale of operation.
Technological advances particular to biomass gasification have been successfully
demonstrated and commercial-scale projects are proceeding. Around the world, more
than 100 biomass gasifier projects are operating or ordered. In the U.S., construction will
begin in 2009 on a 42 MWe commercial-scale project in Tallahassee, Florida, and
another 28 MWe gasifier is planned for Forsythe, Georgia. Small-scale gasification is
moving ahead as well in the U.S. A 300 kW farm-scale demonstration using straw as a
feedstock and a 320 kW project at a sawmill have been constructed and are now
beginning operation.
This publication focuses on gasification of biomass on the small and medium scales
appropriate for food processors, farmers, forest products industries and others with access
to biomass materials. This guide focuses primarily on woody biomass and food and
agricultural residues.

1

―Clean heat and power‖ or CHP refers to clean, efficient local energy generation, including but not
limited to combined heat and power, recycled energy, bioenergy, and other generation sources that lead to a
demonstrable reduction in global greenhouse gas emissions.

1

Table 1. Summary of Bioenergy Conversion Technologies
Technology

Technology
Status

Possible Products

Facility Type

Biogas, power, heat, soil
amendments and
fertilizers, and other coproducts including animal
bedding.

Dairies, food processors,
confined animal feedlots,
wastewater treatment
facilities

Ethanol and distiller‘s
dried grains and coproducts including fiber,
bran, germ and oil.
Cellulosic ethanol,
chemical feedstocks,
hydrogen, and other coproducts

Biofuels, agricultural
and food and beverage
processing industries

Wide range of facility
types, including forest
products, agricultural
and food industries
Wide range of facility
types, including forest
products, agricultural
and food processing
industries
Forest products
industries

Biochemical Conversion
Anaerobic
Digestion

Ethanol
Fermentation

Lignocellulosic
Conversion

Mature with
continuing research
and development
on co-products and
high solids/strength
digesters
Mature with efforts
to reduce the
carbon footprint
Research &
Development with
pilot and
commercial-scale
demonstration
projects in
development

Biofuels and
biorefineries, especially
in the forest products
industry

Thermochemical Conversion
Combustion

Mature

Power, heat, soil
amendments, and other
co-products

Biomass
Gasification

Demonstration
emerging into
commercialization

Power, heat, combustible
gas, chemical feedstocks,
hydrogen, biochar, soil
amendments

Biomass Pyrolysis

Demonstration

Power, heat, liquid fuel
(―bio-oil‖), combustible
gas, chemical feedstocks,
soil amendments, biochar

2

What is Gasification?
Gasification is a thermal conversion process – as is combustion – in which both heat and
a combustible product gas are produced. One method of gasification, referred to as
―partial oxidation,‖ is very similar to combustion except that it occurs with insufficient
oxygen supply for complete combustion to occur. In a second method, the biomass is
indirectly heated in the absence of oxygen or air, with steam as the oxidizing agent.
The product gas is either a medium-energy content gas referred to as ―synthetic gas‖ or
―syngas‖ or a low-energy content gas often referred to as ―producer gas.‖2 Syngas
consists primarily of carbon monoxide and hydrogen. Higher quality syngas can be
produced by indirect heating or by using pure oxygen as the oxidizing agent (―oxygenblowing‖). Producer gas results if air is used as the oxidizing agent (―air-blowing‖),
which dilutes the combustible components of the gas with nitrogen. Generally, producer
gas is adequate for power generation and avoids the energy use associated with oxygen
production. Syngas is required for chemical production.
The product gas can be burned in conventional boilers, furnaces, engines and turbines, or
co-fired with natural gas, with minor modifications to conventional equipment. Since
both producer gas and syngas have lower heating values than propane or natural gas,
enlarging orifices and adjusting control settings may be required. The product gas can
also be used in solid-fuel boilers as a reburn fuel that is injected into the boiler.
As a note on terminology, the term ―gasifier‖ has been applied to staged-air combustion
appliances in which product gas generated in a first stage is burned in a second stage of
an integrated unit or closely coupled unit with no provision for collecting the product gas.
However, in this guide, the terms ―gasifier‖ and ―gasification‖ are used to refer only to
equipment that is designed to obtain both a combustible product gas and heat as separate
products.

2

It is quite common and accepted to use the term ―syngas‖ to refer to the product gas in general, whether
syngas or producer gas as defined here. However, other references make a clear distinction in terminology,
as does this guide. Some references also use the term ―biogas‖ to refer to the product gas of biomass
gasification. However, this is easily confused with the methane rich-gas produced by anaerobic digestion,
which is more commonly referred to as biogas.

3

Why Gasification?
Gasification has several advantages that make it an appropriate choice in certain types of
projects.
Gasification occurs at lower temperatures than combustion.
Because gasification is a lower temperature process than combustion, gasifiers can have
longer lifetimes and lower maintenance costs than combustion appliances, such as woodfired boilers. Likewise, air emissions are generally lower with gasification since nitrogen
and sulfur oxides are created at higher temperatures.
A variety of products are possible with gasification.
The gasification process results in co-products that can result in other revenue streams for
a project. Syngas can be used as a feedstock to produce other fuels (such as ethanol,
methanol, naptha, hydrogen, gasoline and diesel) and as a feedstock for chemicals (such
as acetic acid, dimethyl ether, and ammonia). The oils, char and ash that are often
generated in gasification may be marketable precursors for products such as soil
amendments, filtration media and cement additive. The char in particular can have a high
value as a co-product.
Gasification has synergies with existing fossil fuel infrastructure.
Gasification has synergies with fossil fuel use that can facilitate our transition to
renewable energy. As an example of a synergistic opportunity, liquid transportation fuels
produced from syngas can be distributed through our current fueling infrastructure. Also,
syngas and producer gas can be co-fired with natural gas in conventional turbines and
fuel cells or co-fired in coal-fired boilers to generate electricity. Bio-hydrogen produced
from syngas can be used in conjunction with hydrogen produced from natural gas.
Facilities that currently use coal syngas in the production of chemicals can supplement it
with syngas from biomass using existing infrastructure.
Gaseous fuels are easier to transport than solid biomass.
Gaseous fuels can be distributed by pipeline from a gasification plant for direct use in
other locations. There are various scenarios where this would be an advantage. As one
example, a gasifier could be located at the most convenient point of biomass collection
with the product gas piped to users located off site. As another example, available space
within a manufacturing facility may prohibit locating a biomass-fired boiler or furnace
and its ancillary equipment within the facility. In this case, a gasifier could be located
elsewhere with the product gas piped to the point of use. As a note of caution, the
gasifier should still be located where there is a use for its heat to achieve the high
efficiencies possible with CHP systems.
Landfill gas use in this country serves as an illustration of this potential. Of the
approximately 500 landfill gas projects existing in the U.S., about a third pipe the gas in
dedicated pipelines to nearby industrial customers to offset fossil fuel use. Biogas
pipelines range from 200 yards to more than 20 miles.

4

Use of turbines, engines and fuel cells increases efficiency of electricity generation.
An important advantage of gasification compared to combustion is its potential to achieve
higher efficiencies and lower emissions. Generating a gaseous fuel makes the use of
reciprocating engines, gas turbines and fuel cells possible in the generation of electricity.
Gas turbines, fuel cells and engines are more efficient electrical generation technologies
than the steam cycle to which solid biomass is limited. The efficiency of a biomass-fired
steam turbine system is between 20% and 25%. In comparison, syngas-fueled engines
and turbines can achieve system efficiencies in the range of 30% to 40%, with higher
efficiencies possible in integrated combined cycles.
In considering overall efficiency, it is important to examine losses in the gasification
process itself in converting biomass to the product gas in addition to improved electrical
efficiency. If the chars and tars that result in gasification are reburned and the heat of
gasification is recovered, high conversion efficiencies can be achieved.
Gasification makes biomass-fired integrated combined cycles possible.
Gasification makes possible a highly efficient configuration for generating electricity
(that is not possible with combustion of biomass), referred to as an integrated gasification
combined cycle (IGCC). In an IGCC system, the product gas is first burned in a gas
turbine to generate electricity (topping cycle). Second, waste heat from both the turbine
and the gasifier is recovered in a heat recovery boiler and used to generate electricity by a
steam turbine (bottoming cycle). Such a system can achieve high electrical efficiencies
of 42% to 48%. If low-pressure steam is also recovered from the steam turbine and other
heat recovery opportunities in the system are taken advantage of, overall efficiencies of
60% to more than 90% can be achieved. Note that IGCC systems are cost effective only
on larger scales due to the high capital cost of the gasifier, gas turbine, boiler and steam
turbine, plus ancillary equipment.
The first project to demonstrate the IGCC technology operated from 1993 to 2000 in
Varnamo, Sweden, producing 6 MWe of power and 9 MWth of heat in short stints for
research and development purposes. The IGCC plant soon to begin construction in
Tallahassee, Florida, will deliver both methanated syngas and high efficiency, renewable
power to the City of Tallahassee.
Gasification can facilitate combined heat and power.
If heat from both the gasification process and electrical generation are recovered, overall
efficiencies of 60% to more than 90% can be achieved. Such combined heat and power
(CHP) is possible with both combustion and gasification. But because gaseous fuels can
be piped over a distance, gasification can facilitate combined heat and power projects in
cases where the best use of heat from the gasifier and the best or most convenient use of
the product gas are not in close proximity.
In the most cost effective CHP projects, heat recovery is cascaded through a series of
applications with each step using a lower temperature. Heat can be recovered from the
gasification process and from electrical generation equipment. Waste heat can be used in
a variety of ways, such as generating steam and hot water, space heating, generating
5

power using an organic Rankine cycle turbine, or meeting cooling and refrigerating needs
with absorption chillers.

Comparison with Other Thermal Conversion Processes
Combustion, gasification and pyrolysis are three thermal conversion processes by which
energy is obtained from biomass. Distinctions between these three processes are
summarized in Tables 2 and 3. In short, combustion occurs with sufficient oxygen to
completely oxidize the fuel, i.e. convert all carbon to carbon dioxide, all hydrogen to
water, and all the sulfur to sulfur dioxide. Gasification occurs with insufficient oxygen or
with steam such that complete oxidation does not occur. Pyrolysis occurs in the absence
of an oxidizing agent (air, oxygen, or steam). As an intermediate process between
combustion and pyrolysis, gasification is sometimes referred to as ―partial oxidization‖
and sometimes as ―partial pyrolysis.‖
Gasification, combustion and pyrolysis each have advantages and disadvantages. In any
particular project, it is important to evaluate the goal of the project, the biomass resources
available, and particular needs of the facility in choosing a thermal conversion process.

Gasification versus Combustion
In choosing between gasification and combustion, consider if generating a product gas is
an advantage. Also, consider the possibility of achieving higher electrical efficiency by
burning the product gas in an engine or turbine, as opposed to generating electricity by
the conventional steam cycle. Another factor to consider is that gasification projects may
be eligible for more grants and incentives than the more tried and true combustion
projects—at least for a time. Greater carbon emission reductions may also bring in
revenue in carbon offset markets.
In a financial analysis comparing gasification and combustion options, the lower
operating and maintenance costs and longer equipment lives possible with gasification
should be considered. The lower air emissions of gasifiers (and possibly reduced cost of
air emissions equipment) should be considered in estimating capital costs.
Gasifiers may be designed and operated to favor thermal efficiency over production of a
char, or vice versa. In comparison, combustion appliances are operated to maximize
efficiency by minimizing char. In a financial analysis of a gasification project, the value
of producing char as a marketable byproduct versus achieving high efficiency may be a
consideration. Note some gasifiers are designed to produce no char and their thermal
efficiency can be very similar to that of a well-tuned combustion appliance.
Combustion technologies are well-established and widespread. While gasification has
been successfully demonstrated in projects of several megawatts in size over a number of
years, it is still an emerging commercial technology. As capital costs drop, operating

6

experience increases, and the economic value of carbon emission reductions increases,
cost effectiveness of gasification compared to combustion will improve.
At this point in time, if the primary end use is electricity generation on relatively small
scales, combustion of biomass in a biomass-fired boiler with electricity generated using a
steam turbine will likely be more cost effective than a gasification system generating
electricity with an internal combustion engine or turbine. Similarly, if the desired
product is only heat, whether for industrial process heat, space heating, or water heating,
a biomass-fired boiler or furnace will likely be most cost effective at this time, although
other factors discussed above may in some cases tip the balance toward gasification.

Gasification versus Pyrolysis
Another promising thermal conversion technology, sometimes confused with
gasification, is pyrolysis. While gasification occurs with restricted oxygen, pyrolysis
occurs in the absence of oxygen or steam. In pyrolysis, biomass is heated to the point
where volatile gases and liquids are driven off and then condensed into a combustible,
water soluble liquid fuel called bio-oil (not to be confused with bio-diesel.) Bio-oil from
fast pyrolysis3 is a low viscosity, dark-brown fluid with a high tar content and a water
content of 15% to 20%. Bio-oil can be burned in a boiler, upgraded for use in engines
and turbines, or used as a chemical feedstock. Being a liquid fuel, bio-oil is easier to
transport than syngas but its corrosiveness makes long-term storage difficult.
Both gasification and pyrolysis produce char, which can be used as a soil amendment,
precursor to activated carbon, or burned. Slow pyrolysis results in a higher percentage of
char (up to 35%), if that is a more desired co-product. Such uses of the biochar can make
gasification and pyrolysis carbon neutral or even carbon negative (refer to the section
―Environmental Advantages‖ below).
Pyrolysis is a less mature technology compared to gasification. There are fewer
manufacturers of pyrolysis reactors and a small number of demonstration projects, which
have shorter histories. Manufacturers of pyrolysis reactors are Dynamotive, BEST, Lurgi
and Ensyn Technologies. BEST has had one pilot project and one small demonstration
project. Dynamotive has two demonstration projects. For more information on
pyrolysis, refer to IEA Bioenergy‘s PyNe website at http://www.pyne.co.uk/ and the
Bioenergy Technology Group‘s website at
http://www.btgworld.com/index.php?id=22&rid=8&r=rd.
In choosing between gasification and pyrolysis, consider whether the higher production
of biochar in pyrolysis is desirable in your case. Also, consider whether a liquid fuel is
more advantageous in your particular application than a gaseous fuel. In particular, a
liquid fuel, such as bio-oil, has a higher energy density than syngas, which reduces
3

Fast pyrolysis occurs at a relatively low temperature of around 500°C (900°F) and the biomass has short
residence times of 2 seconds or less. Intermediate and slow pyrolysis occur at higher temperatures and
have longer residence times. As residence time increases, char content increases (up to about 35%), tar
content decreases and water content of the bio-oil increases (up to about 75%).

7

transportation costs. On the other hand, bio-oil is corrosive, which increases
transportation and storage costs.
Table 2. Comparison of Combustion, Gasification and Pyrolysis
Combustion

Gasification

Pyrolysis

Oxidizing Agent

Greater than
stoichiometric supply
of oxygen*

Less than
stoichiometric oxygen*
or steam as the
oxidizing agent

Absence of oxygen or
steam

Typical
Temperature
Range with
Biomass Fuels

800oC to 1200oC
(1450oF to 2200oF)

800oC to 1200oC
(1450oF to 2200oF

350oC to 600oC
(660oF to 1100oF)

Principle Products

Heat

Heat and
Combustible gas

Heat,
Combustible liquid
and Combustible gas

Principle
Components of
Gas

CO2 and H2O

CO and H2

CO and H2

* In stoichiometric combustion, air supply is the theoretical quantity necessary to completely oxidize the
fuel. For cellulosic biomass, which has an average composition of C6H10O5, the stoichiometric air supply is
6 to 6.5 lb of air per lb of biomass.

Table 3. Predominant Components of Products from Fast Pyrolysis and
Gasification
Oil and
Char
Tars, Water
Product Gas
(Solid)
(Liquid)
Fast pyrolysis
Medium temperature, T=~500oC
Short residence time (<2 s)
Gasification
Higher temperature, T>800oC
1.
2.

60% to 70%

10% to 15%

10% to 25%

Up to 20%1

Up to +20%2

~85%

Updraft gasifiers produce 10% to 20% tar, while tar content from downdraft gasifiers is low.
Downdraft gasifiers produce 20% or more char, while char content from updraft gasifiers is low.

8

System Equipment
A gasification project will consist of various components. In addition to the gasifier, a
gasification project may have a turbine or reciprocating engine, generator set, pellet mill,
grinder, biomass dryer, material feeders, gas clean-up equipment, and gas storage and
handling equipment.

Types of Gasifiers
Types of gasifiers currently used in biomass gasification include fixed-bed, fluidized-bed
and indirectly heated steam gasifiers. Characteristics of these types of gasifiers are
summarized in Table 4. Other types of gasifiers, discussed only briefly here, include
entrained bed, plasma arc, and super-critical water gasifiers. Within these general
classifications, there are many different designs that have been developed. For examples
of a number of fluidized bed gasifiers refer to ―Combustion and Gasification in Fluidized
Beds‖ (Basu 2006).

Fixed-Bed Downdraft and Updraft Gasifiers
The most common types of fixed-bed gasifiers are downdraft (or co-current type) and
updraft (or counter-current type). More recently, designs that combine characteristics
from updraft and downdraft gasifiers have been developed.
Fixed-bed gasifiers operate on a smaller scale than other types and so are often the
most suitable choice for many types of biomass projects, such as at food processing
facilities. Updraft gasifiers can have capacities of about 10 MW or less. Downdraft
gasifiers can have capacities of about 2 MW or less.
The defining difference between updraft and downdraft gasifiers is the direction of
gas flow through the unit, as shown in Figure 1. In downdraft gasifiers, the oxidizing
agent (air or pure oxygen with or without steam) enters at the top of the gasifier with
product gas exiting at the bottom. Gas flow is the reverse in updraft gasifiers.
Downdraft gasifiers produce syngas that typically has low tar and particulate content.
They can produce as much as 20% char, but more typically char content is 2% to
10%. While production of char reduces the quantity of energy contained in the
syngas, it can be used as a fuel (charcoal) and reburned in the gasifier, or marketed as
a soil amendment or as a precursor for activated charcoal filtration medium. Because
char often has a high value, gasifiers are sometimes operated to produce high
quantities of char at the expense of gas production.
Downdraft gasifiers are easy to control. They have outlet temperatures of 800°C
(1450°F) and operating temperatures of 800°C to 1200°C (1450°F to 2200°F).
Efficiency can be on par with updraft gasifiers, if heat from hot product gas is
transferred to inlet air. A drawback of downdraft gasifiers is that the feedstock must
have a moisture content of about 20% or lower. As discussed in the Section
9

―Feedstock Characteristics and Requirements‖ below, materials meeting this limit
include dry woods, nut shells, and rice husks. Other materials can be dried, but
drying moist feedstocks impacts the cost effectiveness of a project because of the cost
of the dryer and the energy required for drying.
The updraft gasifier has been the principal gasifier used for coal for 150 years.
Updraft gasifiers have high thermal efficiency, are easy to control, and are more
tolerant of fuel switching than downdraft gasifiers. Updraft gasifiers have outlet
temperatures of 250°C (480°F) and operating temperatures of 800°C to 1200°C
(1450oF to 2200oF). An advantage is that they can handle moisture contents as high
as 55%. A disadvantage is that they have high tar production and so require more
extensive cleaning of the syngas. Tar removal from the product gas has been a major
problem in updraft gasifiers.
Manufacturers of updraft gasifiers include PRM (Primenergy, USA), Nexterra
(Canada), Emery (USA), Lurgi (Germany), Purox (USA), and Babcock Wilcox
Volund (Denmark).
Manufacturers and suppliers of downdraft gasifiers include Biomass Engineering,
Ltd. (UK), Community Power Corporation (USA), Dasag Energy (Switzerland),
Fluidyne (New Zealand), Martezo (France), Biomass Engineering LTD/Shawton
Engineering (UK), Ankur Scientific Energy Technologies (India), Thermogenics
(USA), and Associated Engineering Works (India).
VTT Energy in cooperation with Condens Oy and Entimos Oy (all from Finland)
offer a combination updraft-downdraft fixed-bed gasifier. These are designed to
achieve the higher efficiencies of updraft gasifiers with the low tar production of
downdraft gasifiers.

10

Figure 1. Updraft and Downdraft Fixed-Bed Gasifiers*
Updraft (Counter-Current) Gasifier

Downdraft (Co-Current) Gasifier

* There are many variations in specific designs. For example, solid fuel is not fed from the top in some
designs.

Fluidized Bed Gasifiers
In fluidized bed gasifiers, the oxidizing agent and fuel are mixed in a hot bed of
granular solids. Solid fuel and bed particles are fluidized by gas flow. The bed is
usually composed of sand, limestone, dolomite or alumina. Gases and remaining
solids are separated afterwards by cyclone. There are two types of fluidized bed
gasifiers: bubbling and circulating. Bubbling fluidized bed gasifiers are appropriate
for medium size projects of 25 MWth or less, while circulating fluidized bed gasifiers
can range from a few MWth up to very large units.
Fluidized bed gasifiers are especially good for biomass gasification. They have very
good fuel flexibility and so can be considered true multifuel units. Wood waste,
straw, and refuse-derived fuel, as examples, can be gasified in the same unit, although
the heat output varies with the heat value of the fuel. Fluidized bed gasifiers reduce
gas contaminant problems often associated with agricultural biomass. Due to their
lower operating temperatures, ash does not melt, which makes its removal relatively
easy and reduces problems with slagging. Sulfur and chloride are absorbed in the bed
material, reducing fouling and corrosion.
Fluidized bed gasifiers are more compact and have higher throughput than fixed bed
gasifiers. Their efficiency is lower, but can be improved by recirculating gas. The
product gas has low tar content, but has a high level of particulates.
Manufacturers and suppliers of fluidized bed gasifiers for biomass include Energy
Products of Idaho (USA), Foster Wheeler (Finland), METSO Power (formerly
Kvaerner, Finland), Carbona (formerly Tampella, Enviropower, Vattenfall, USA),
Lurgi (Germany), TPS Termiska (Sweden), Cratech (USA), Stein (UK), Gas
Technology Institute (USA), Southern Electric International (USA), Sur-Lite Corp.
(USA), Enerkem/Biosyn (Canada), Sydkraft (Sweden), Elsam/Elkraft (Denmark),
11

Biomass Technology Group (USA), and ABB (Switzerland). Manufacturers often
specialize in gasification of particular types of feedstocks. While some of these have
focused on woody biomass and/or agricultural wastes, others specialize in black
liquor and paper mill sludges, and others on municipal solid waste.

Indirectly Heated Steam Fluidized Bed Gasifiers
Indirectly heated steam gasification was specifically designed to take advantage of
the particular properties of biomass, such as high reactivity, low ash, low sulfur, and
high volatile matter. The development of other types of biomass gasifiers was
heavily influenced by coal gasification technology and so they are not optimum for
biomass. For example, the high reactivity of biomass means that greater throughputs
(i.e. higher rate of gasification) are possible with indirectly heated steam gasifiers, but
the throughputs of other types of gasifiers are very limited. Throughputs of indirectly
heated gasifiers can be several times that of other types of gasifiers.
The SilvaGas or Taylor-type indirectly heated gasifier consists primarily of two
chambers: the gasifier and the combustor. In the gasifier, the biomass mixes with
steam and a heated solid medium, such as sand, in a circulating fluidized bed. No air
or oxygen is added. The biomass is rapidly converted into syngas, char and tars at a
temperature of approximately 850°C (1550°F). The solid particles – char and sand –
are separated from the gas stream and directed to the combustor where the char is
burned, reheating the circulating sand to 1000°C (1800°F). The reheated sand is then
conveyed back to the gasifier to supply energy for gasification of the incoming
biomass. The bubbling fluidized bed indirect gasifier developed by Manufacturing
and Technology Conversion International, Inc (MTCI), primarily used for black
liquor and paper mill sludges, is similar in that it consists of two stages, a lower
combustor and an upper steam reforming stage.
Indirectly heated gasifiers are inherently more complicated than directly-heated
systems due to the need for a separate combustion chamber, and so have a higher
capital cost. This is offset to a certain degree compared to oxygen-blown gasifiers
because an oxygen separation plant (with its efficiency penalty) is not required.
Indirectly heated gasifiers produce high quality syngas without the need for
separation of oxygen from air for use as the oxidizing agent. The syngas has a higher
percentage of methane and higher hydrocarbons, which poses a greater challenge in
producing liquid fuels, chemicals and hydrogen.
Significantly fewer emissions are produced in this process. In particular, not having
oxygen in the gasifier makes it impossible to form dioxins if a chlorine-containing
feedstock (such as processed municipal solid waste or recycled paper pulp sludges) is
used.
In the U.S. a 12 MW SilvaGas gasifier was demonstrated in 2000 to 2002 at the
existing wood combustion facility at the McNeil Generating Station in Burlington,

12

Vermont. A 42 MWe SilvaGas-type gasifier will be installed in Tallahassee, Florida,
with construction to begin in early 2009.
Developers and manufacturers of this type of gasifier include FERCO/SilvaGas
(USA), Manufacturing and Technology Conversion International, Inc. (USA), TRI,
Inc. (USA), Taylor Biomass Energy (USA), the Technical University of Denmark,
and Repotec (Austria).

Other Types of Gasifiers
Entrained Bed Gasifiers: In entrained bed gasifiers, fine fuel particles are suspended
by the movement of gas to move it through the gasifier. An example of an entrained
bed gasifier is the Chemrec black liquor gasifier. A Chemrec gasifier was installed in
1996 at the Weyerhaeuser mill in New Bern, North Carolina. Entrained bed gasifiers
require large scale to be cost effective and so are not practical for many biomass
projects.
Supercritical Water Gasifiers: Materials with moisture contents up to 95% can be
gasified with the use of supercritical water. This process is still in development, but
promises to widen the range of possible feedstocks. For more information on
supercritical water gasification, refer to Biomass Technology Group‘s website at
http://www.btgworld.com/index.php?id=25&rid=8&r=rd.
Plasma Arc Gasifiers: In plasma arc gasification, electricity is fed to a torch, which
has two electrodes, creating an arc. Inert gas is passed through the arc, heating the
process gas to internal temperatures as high as 14,000°C (25,000°F). The temperature
a few feet from the torch can be as high as 3,000°C to 4,000°C (5,000° to 8000ºF.)
Because of these high temperatures the waste is completely destroyed and broken
down into its basic elemental components. Plasma arc gasification has been used in
the gasification of municipal solid waste, especially in Asia.
Close-coupled Gasifiers: ―Close-coupled‖ or ―multi-stage‖ gasifiers4 are essentially
staged-air combustion appliances (i.e. boilers or furnaces). Staged-air combustion is
a conventional technology that is widely applied in both large and small combustion
appliances. In any combustion of a solid – whether in a woodstove, furnace or boiler
– volatile materials are first pyrolyzed and gasified followed by full combustion of
gases. Most commonly, these processes occur in a single stage. In staged-air boilers
and furnaces, thermal conversion occurs in two stages of an integrated unit. In the
first stage, the biomass is gasified by restricting air flow. In the second stage,
sufficient air is supplied for full combustion of the gases. A product gas is not
extracted from staged-air combustion appliances as a separate product. In this guide,

4

Integrated staged-air combustion appliances units are sometimes called ―two-stage‖ or ―multi-stage‖
gasifiers, not to be confused with indirectly heated steam gasifiers, which are also often referred to as ―twostage‖ or ―dual-stage‖ gasifiers.

13

the term ―gasifier‖ refers only to appliances that produce a combustible gas as a
separate product.
The primary advantage of staged-air combustion compared to conventional singlestage boilers and furnaces is reduced air emissions. There can be an efficiency
penalty compared to single stage combustion appliances due to greater production of
char.
A small-scale example of a ―close-coupled gasifier‖ is ChipTec‘s Wood Energy
Biomass Gasification System (see http://www.chiptec.com/). On a larger scale,
Primenergy‘s projects in Stuttgart, Arkansas, and Little Falls, Minnesota, combust the
syngas in a closely coupled combustor to generate electricity in a steam cycle.
Other Types: Many other gasifier concepts have been developed and manufactured.
The reference ―Initial Review and Evaluation of Process Technologies and Systems
Suitable for Cost-Efficient Medium-Scale Gasification for Biomass to Liquid Fuels‖
(Olafsson, et al. 2005) provides a comprehensive summary with advantages and
disadvantages of each. In addition to those discussed here, other types discussed are
crossdraft fixed bed gasifiers, the Lurgi dry ash gasifier, slagging gasifiers, cyclone
gasifiers, vertical vortex gasifiers, horizontal vortex pyrolyser, ablative pyrolysers,
vacuum pyrolysers, screwing gasifiers, twin screw pyrolysers, rotary kiln gasifiers,
heat pipe gasifiers, the thermal ballasted latent heat gasifier, the ―Carbo-V‖ gasifier
and the NREL thermochemical process development unit.

14

Table 4. Summary of Selected Biomass Gasifier Types
Typical Temperatures
Gasifier
Type
Downdraft
Fixed Bed

Updraft
Fixed Bed

Scale

5 kWth to
2 MWth

<10 MWth

Reaction

Operating

1000°C

800°C

(1800°F)

(1450°F)

1000°C

250°C

(1800°F)

(480°F)

850°C

800°C

(1550°F)

(1450°F)

Bubbling
Fluidized
Bed

<25 MWth

Circulating
Fluidized
Bed

A few MWth
up to
100 MWth

850°C

850°C

(1550°F)

(1550°F)

Indirectly
Heated
Steam
Gasification

Large scale

850°C

800°C

(1550°F)

(1450°F)

Fuel Requirements
Moisture
Content
Flexibility
(%)
Less tolerant of
<20%
fuel switching
Requires uniform
particle size
Large particles

Efficiency

Gas
Characteristics

Very good

Very low tar
Moderate
particulates

Other Notes
Small Scale
Easy to control
Produces biochar at low
temperatures.
Low throughput.
Higher maintenance costs
Small- and Medium-Scale
Easy to control
Can handle high moisture content
Low throughput

up to
50%-55%

More tolerant of
fuel switching
than downdraft

Excellent

Very high tar
(10% to 20%)
Low particulates
High methane

<5 to 10%

Very fuel flexible
Can tolerate high
ash feedstocks
Requires small
particle size

Good

Moderate tar
Very high in
particulates

Medium Scale
Higher throughput
Reduced char
Ash does not melt
Simpler than circulating bed

<5 to 10%

Very fuel flexible
Can tolerates
high ash
feedstocks
Requires small
particle size

Very Good

Low tar
Very high in
particulates

Medium to Large Scale
Higher throughput
Reduced char
Ash does not melt
Excellent fuel flexibility
Smaller size than bubbling
fluidized bed

Flexible

Very flexible,
does not require
sizing, pelletizing
or drying

Excellent

High methane
yield

Very high throughput
Low emissions, even with high
chlorine feedstocks such as MSW
High capital cost

15

Engines and Turbines
In addition to the steam cycle, three electricity generation technologies used in
gasification power projects are: gas turbines, internal combustion engines, and fuel cells.
These three technologies require gas cleaning to remove tars and particulates prior to use.
Fuel cells in particular have very high gas cleaning requirements that are not discussed
here. For more information, refer to Fuel Cells 2000 (http://www.fuelcells.org/.)
Producer gas and syngas have lower heating values than propane or natural gas and so
some modifications to combustion equipment, such as enlarging orifices in burners, may
be required. If they are used to supplement natural gas or propane, rather than replacing
it, orifices may not need to be enlarged, depending on the fraction of syngas or producer
gas.
For a discussion of various engines, turbines, and fuel cells used with syngas or producer
gas refer to the International Energy Agency‘s ―Review of Energy Conversion Devices‖
http://media.godashboard.com/gti/IEA/ReviewofEnergyConversionDevicesrev.pdf.

Reciprocating Engines
Converting a natural gas powered, internal combustion engine to run on syngas or
producer gas is relatively simple. Reciprocating engines have advantages of low
capital cost, small size, easy start-up, reliability, good load-following characteristics
and good heat recovery potential. They have much lower requirements for gas
cleaning than microturbines.
Commercially available reciprocating engines for power generation range from 0.5
kW up to several megawatts. Manufacturers of reciprocating engines that have been
used in biopower projects include General Motors, General Electric Jenbacher,
Caterpillar, Wartsila, Guascor, Tessari Energia, and DEUTZ.
As one example, a General Electric Jenbacher website states that their engines are
―designed from the outset to run on gas (not diesel engine conversions) – either
natural gas, biogas or special gases. All engines are able to operate with various
natural gas, biogas and syngas fuel specifications.‖ Refer to http://www.clarkeenergy.co.uk/gas_engines.html.
External combustion Stirling engines can also be used in biopower applications.
Manufacturers of Stirling engines include Sigma Elektroteknisk (Norway), Whisper
Tech of Christchurch (New Zealand), Kockums Air Independent Propulsion System
(Sweden), Sunpower (USA), STM Power (USA), and Free Breeze (Canada).

Microturbines
Microturbines offer several potential advantages compared to engines, including
compact size and lighter weight, greater efficiency, lower emissions, and low
16

operations and maintenance costs. On the downside, their tolerance for tars and
particulates is lower and so require more extensive gas clean-up. Manufacturers of
microturbines include Capstone, Turbec, Bowman Power Systems, Ingersoll Rand,
Elliot Energy Systems, and UTC Power.
In the 1993 to 2000 IGCC demonstration project at Varnamo, Sweden, power was
generated with a standard gas turbine that was only slightly modified. ―The
modifications made, i.e. air extraction, modified burners and combustion chambers,
proved to perform extremely well and no pilot flame was ever needed for maintaining
a stable combustion.‖ Tar removal was largely accomplished by using magnesite as
the fluidized bed material (Ducente 2006).
Operation of a 30 kW Capstone microturbine using syngas is described in the study
―Micro Gas Turbine Operation with Biomass Producer Gas,‖ available at
http://www.ecn.nl/docs/library/report/2007/m07073.pdf:
The Capstone micro gas turbine is a standard 30 kWe version without
modifications except for software settings altered to manage the lower
calorific value of the gas. The required power output is entered manually. The
software selects the corresponding operating conditions…
A separate compressor is needed to compress gas to the required entrance
pressure of about 4 bar.
In our tests, the micro gas turbine starts up on natural gas. When operating
conditions are stable, we gradually replace natural gas by producer gas until
the gas valve is fully opened or until operation becomes unstable. For
measurements requiring prolonged operation, slightly more natural gas is
added than the minimum needed. That way, the operating system retains a
margin to counteract fluctuations in the heating value of producer gas.
Gas clean-up in that study is summarized as follows:
The gas is cooled to 400°C before dust is removed by a cyclone. Tar is
removed by the OLGA system developed by ECN and marketed by Dahlman.
A water scrubber removes NH3 and reduces the water content to the water
vapour pressure near the temperature of the surroundings.

17

Size Reduction
Size reduction is often required before biomass can be used either for direct feed into the
gasifier or prior to drying or densification into pellets or briquettes. Smaller particles
take up less storage space, are easier to feed and require less energy to dry. The size of
the particles fed into the gasifier must meet the requirements of the particular gasifier
used. In general, fluidized-bed gasifiers require smaller size than fixed-bed gasifiers.
Generally size reduction is accomplished by chopping, shredding, or impact with either
portable diesel-powered or stationary electric-powered equipment. Agricultural crops and
woody biomass typically have different equipment requirements. Many manufacturers
and suppliers who can help with selecting the appropriate equipment can be found on the
internet.
Hammermills, which reduce size by impact, may be used with woody fuels and also are
used as agricultural choppers to prepare hay, grasses, stalks and stovers. Rotating cutters
can handle similar feedstocks, but have smaller capacities than hammermills.
Chipping and hammer hogging are two preferred methods of reducing woody fuels.
Hammermills, or hammer hogs, are necessary for dirty wood or bark with soil or stones.
For grinding stumps or dirty small branches, use a hammermill mounted on a forwarder
or on a tub grinder. Disc chippers or drum chippers are often used on clean wood, such
as off-cuts, edging, and slabs. Disc chippers are also used for forest residues like large
branches and tops. In small secondary processing industries like pallet manufacturers or
joineries, tooth shredders are often used.
Size of woody material may also need to be reduced at the point of collection. Loading
into trucks and size reduction can accomplished together using balers and bundlers.
Bundlers and grapplers may be equipped with chain saw blades or rotary blades, such
that as material is picked up it is also cut into manageable lengths.

Densification
Densification of the feedstock by pelletizing or briquetting facilitates automatic handling,
increases feedstock flexibility by mixing different feedstocks, and ensures the correct
particle size and uniformity. Densification also reduces transportation costs and storage
requirements.

Pellet Mills
A pellet mill compresses and molds the biomass into the shape of a pellet. Pellet mills are
available from small to large sizes.
Pellet mills require feedstocks with low moisture contents. As one manufacturer put it,
―if the moisture content is too high, instead of pellets, you‘ll have material squirting out
of it.‖ According to manufacturer‘s representatives, CPM pellet mills require about 25%
moisture content (MC) or less. Bliss pellet mills require 10% to 15% MC. The material
18

type should be consistent. Most materials will need grinding and drying prior to
pelletizing.
Wood chips are easier to pelletize than low density biomass such as straw. Straw pellets
tend to break easily if not handled with care and are more sensitive to moisture, which
can cause problems when handling.
Manufacturers of pellet mills include:
Andritz Sprout Bauer www.andritzsproutbauer.com/pellet-mills.asp
Bliss Industries, Inc. www.bliss-industries.com
Buhler (Canada) Inc. www.buhlergroup.com/33794EN.htm?grp=60
CPM and Roskamp Champion
www.cpmroskamp.com/pdf/WoodPelleting_brochure.pdf
GEMCO Energy Machinery www.biofuelmachine.com/index.htm
Janicki Industries www.janicki.com/
Pellet Pros www.pelletpros.com/
Pelleting Concepts International, Inc. www.pelleting.com/
Pellet Systems International www.pelletsystems.com
Pellet Systems International and Bliss Industries have mills suitable for low capacity
systems.

Balers and Bundlers
Mobile balers and bundlers can be used to densify raw biomass at the collection site, so it
can be transferred more cost effectively to a preprocessing or gasification facility. There
are many manufacturers of balers for agricultural products. U.S. manufacturers of balers
and bundlers for forest residues include:
Forest Concepts, http://www.forestconcepts.com/
UPM Tilhill, http://www.upm-tilhill.com
John Deere, www.deere.com
o Refer to
http://www.deere.com/en_US/cfd/forestry/deere_forestry/harvesters/wheel
/1490d_general.html
SuperTrak, Inc, http://www.supertrak.com/
European manufacturers include:
Rogbico (Sweden), http://www.rogbico.se/
Fixteri Oy (Finland), http://www.fixteri.fi
Pinox Oy (Finland)

Torrefaction
Torrefaction is a biomass pre-treatment method in the research and development phase
that in future projects may reduce overall costs in some cases. Biomass torrefaction is
19

carried out at approximately 200°C to 300°C (400°F to 600°F) in the absence of oxygen.
The biomass is completely dried and partially decomposes, losing its tenacious and
fibrous structure. Some of its volatile matter is driven off as a gas. More mass than
energy is lost to the gas phase, resulting in energy densification. The gas can be
recovered and used in the process, so does not represent a loss.
When combined with pelletization, very energy-dense fuel pellets are produced, which
reduces transportation costs if the biomass is pre-treated remotely. The grindability of
the biomass is improved significantly. Biological degradation of torrefied biomass does
not occur, facilitating long-term storage.

Biomass Dryers and Dewatering Equipment
Overall efficiency can often be improved by dewatering and drying biomass prior to
gasification. Drying also improves air emissions and can reduce problems with plugging
of feeders. Corrosion problems due to hydrochloric acid formation are improved by burning
a drier fuel.
Commonly hot exhaust gases from the boiler, engine or turbine are recovered for biomass
drying. Dewatering equipment includes drying beds, filters and screens, presses, and
centrifuges. Passive dewatering methods, such as using filter bags that are impervious to
rain but allow moisture to seep out, can achieve moisture contents as low as 30% at low
cost, but long periods of time – on the order of two to three months – may be required.
There are many types of dryers used in drying biomass, including direct- and indirectfired rotary dryers, conveyor dryers, cascade dryers, flash or pneumatic dryers, and
superheated steam dryers. Selecting the appropriate dryer depends on many factors
including the size and characteristics of the feedstock, capital cost, operation and
maintenance requirements, environmental emissions, energy efficiency, waste heat
sources available, available space, and potential fire hazard.
Small biomass projects may choose a simple dryer such as a perforated floor bin dryer to
dry the feedstock in batches. Some materials, such as park trimmings or husks and stalks,
can be allowed to dry naturally by storing in a covered, open area or by taking advantage
of open-air solar drying. The final moisture content of air-dried materials usually varies
from about 15% to 35%, depending on the size and characteristics of the material and
ambient conditions. Open-air drying is slow and depends on weather conditions. The pile
may need stirring or turning to facilitate drying. Open-air drying is generally not suitable
for high water content feedstocks since they tend to decompose quickly.
For more information, refer to ―Biomass Drying and Dewatering for Clean Heat &
Power‖ (Roos, 2008) available from the Northwest Clean Heat and Power Regional
Application Center at http://www.chpcenternw.org/Default.aspx?tabid=34 .

20

Material Handling Equipment
Feeding is required to move material into and out of storage and into the gasifier.
Handling biomass fuels has proven to be difficult in general. Material handling
equipment should be designed considering that the particle size and composition of the
feedstock may vary. It should also be designed so maintenance and cleaning can be
performed without a stoppage. This can be achieved by introducing buffer stocks of
ready-treated fuel in the vicinity of the feed equipment.
Types of feeders include belt feeders, gravity chutes, screw conveyors, pneumatic
injection, moving hole feeders, chain conveyors, augers, and ram feeders. Material can
also be moved using heavy equipment such as wheel loaders, front-end loaders and
clamshell cranes. In selecting material handling equipment, the following factors should
be considered:
Feedstock Characteristics: Both belt conveyors and chain conveyors can transfer
granular or aggregate product over a distance. Scraper chain conveyors, which move the
material over a stationary surface with a chain that has scrapers attached, are often used
with sawdust, bark and wood chips. For conveying fine materials such as dust or coarse
grain over a short distance, a screw conveyor is generally used. If the material is very
fine, such as fine dust or fine grain (0 to 5 mm), pneumatic injection devices can be used.
Augers, which use a screw to feed fuel on a belt, are often used for hog fuel. Coarse
materials can be transported with a scraper chain conveyor. Ram feeders, which are
essentially hydraulic pushers, are used on materials that are fibrous or sticky or have long
lengths. Moving hole feeders are especially used if particles such as flakes are mixed
with denser solids, to avoid compaction.
Proximity and Level Changes: Screw feeders are only practical for transporting material
over short distances. For longer distances, consider belt conveyors or scraper chain
conveyors. Scraper chain conveyers can be used for level changes while belt conveyors
cannot.
Fuel Metering: Scraper chain conveyors can both mix the material and meter the feed,
which belt conveyors also do not. Screw feeders can meter fuel into the gasifier at a
particular rate. A feeding system that cannot meter fuel, such as a belt conveyor or
gravity chute, are often fed into a separate metering device, such as a screw.
Gasifier pressure: Screw feeders can be used for feeding into high pressure gasifiers up
to several atmospheres. In contrast, gravity chutes require slightly less than atmospheric.
Fuel Dispersal: Some types of feeders, such as pneumatic feeding systems, by nature
disperse fuel well as it is being fed into the gasifier. Others, such as screw feeders and
gravity chutes, do not disperse the fuel well. In these cases, fuel spreaders may be
required.
Minimizing Feeder Plugging: Screw feeders are prone to plugging, which can be
reduced by drying the feedstock and using variable-pitch screws, variable diameter
21

screws, and multiple screws. Multiple screws are especially effective in handling
biomass fuels to avoid plugging.
Mixing Fuel Additives: Limestone or other fuel additives to reduce slagging and fouling
may also need to be fed into the gasifier or mixed with the fuel. Fuel additives may be
pneumatically injected into the gasifier or may be mixed as it is fed into a hopper by a
screw or scraper chain conveyor or other feeder that will mix the fuel.
For more information, refer to ―The Handbook of Biomass Combustion and Co-Firing‖
(Van Loo & Koppejan 2008) and ―Combustion and Gasificaton in Fluidized Beds‖ (Basu
2006).

Feedstock Storage
Storage options include covered or uncovered open areas, designated rooms in an
existing building, hoppers and silos. Silos may have sloping floors or moving floors.
Moving floor silos, in which fuel is moved into a feeder such as an auger at one end of
the silo, are generally used only in large installations because of their expense. Sloping
floor silos are often constructed of plywood and have a rotating arm that pushes fuel into
a feeder inlet along the center of the floor. Gravity hoppers, to which material enters the
top and is removed from the bottom, are suitable for dense materials such as wood
pellets. Lighter materials do not flow well out of a hopper.

Gas Storage
The product gas may be diverted and compressed to provide buffer storage capacity. Storage
compensates for fluctuations in demand from its end use.

Other Ancillary Equipment
The gasifier also will usually require ash or biochar removal equipment. Gas cleanup
equipment will generally be required downstream of the gasifier, as discussed in the
Section ―Gas Cleaning‖ below. In oxygen-blown gasifiers, an oxygen plant is required.
If wet scrubbers are used for tar removal, water treatment will be required. The project
may also include equipment such as boilers, absorption chillers and heat exchangers for
heat recovery, depending on the application.

22

Product Gas Composition
The product gas is primarily composed of carbon monoxide and hydrogen, and if air is
used as the oxidizing agent, nitrogen. The product gas will also have smaller quantities
of carbon dioxide, methane, water and other contaminants, such as tars, char, and ash.
The percentages of each of these components depends on a number of parameters,
including the temperature and pressure of gasification, feedstock characteristics and
moisture content, and whether air or oxygen with or without steam is used for the
process. Significant methane is only produced at high temperatures. More char is
produced at lower temperatures, below about 700°C (1300°F), with a corresponding
decrease in energy content of the product gas.
Product gas heating values typically vary from 15% to 40% of natural gas, as shown in
Table 5.
Table 5. Typical Energy Contents of Producer Gas, Syngas and Natural Gas
Energy Content
3

Producer Gas
Syngas
Natural Gas

(MJ/m )
2.5 to 8
10 to 20
38

23

Btu/ft3
65 to 220
270 to 540
1,028

Feedstock Characteristics and Requirements
Almost any carbon containing material can be gasified, provided the material meets
requirements of the particular equipment. Moisture content and chemical content of
feedstocks should be carefully considered. Also, different kinds of gasifiers have
different requirements for particle size and uniformity.

Moisture Content
Moisture content is critical in combustion, gasification and pelletization. Maximum
moisture contents required for gasification depend on the gasifier type. Downdraft fixed
bed gasifiers cannot tolerate moisture contents above about 20%. Updraft fixed bed
gasifiers and fluidized bed gasifiers can tolerate higher moisture contents of 50% and
65%, respectively. Moisture contents can be as high as 95% in gasifiers using the
supercritical water process, but this type of gasifier is still in the research and
development phase. Pellet mills also generally require moisture contents of less than
15% to produce stable and durable pellets.
Wastes with very high moisture contents often cannot be dried cost effectively except
perhaps by passive dewatering methods, such as using filter bags. For these wastes,
conversion technologies such as anaerobic digestion and fermentation will likely be more
cost effective than combustion or gasification.
The moisture contents of some common biomass feedstocks are summarized in Table 6.

Chemical Content
The chemical content of biofuels influences slagging, fouling and corrosion of gasifier
and heat exchanger components.5 For most biomass fuels, silicon, potassium, calcium,
chlorine, sulfur and to some extent phosphorous, are the principal elements involved in
the fouling of surfaces. In general feedstocks for gasification should preferably have a
high carbon-to-nitrogen ratio, low sulfur content, low chlorine content, and low silica
content. The molar ratio of sulfur to chlorine (S/Cl) should also be low since strong
corrosion tends to occur when S/Cl is below 2 and moderate corrosion when S/Cl is 2 to
4. The ash content of common biomass materials is summarized in Table 6. Tables 7
and 8 give more detail on selected biomass fuels.
Alkali salts, potassium in particular, are responsible for much of the fouling, sulfation,
corrosion and silicate formation found in biomass boilers. Straws, other grasses and
herbaceous materials, younger tissues of woody species, nut hulls and shells, and other
annual biomass contain about 1% potassium dry weight. The leaves and branches of
5

Slagging occurs when a material is melted and then condenses on surfaces or accumulates as hard, dense
particles or ―clinkers‖. Fouling refers to deposits on surfaces that have not melted.

24

wood have higher levels of potassium than the mature stem wood. Sodium and
potassium salts in ash vaporize at temperatures of about 700 oC (1300oF). As a vapor,
they are not easily separated by physical methods such as filtration. Condensation begins
at about 650oC (1200oF), first on particulates in the gas forming clinkers and then on
cooler surfaces in the system as slag.
High silica content is associated with slagging. However, high silica alone does not
present much of a problem. It is the combination of high silica with alkali and alkaline
metals, especially potassium, that can lead to the formation of slag. Thus, rice hulls,
which may contain 20% silica by weight but have low potassium content, do not easily
slag. But many types of straw, grasses and stover – which have both high silica and
potassium – are very prone to slagging.
Fouling and slagging seem to be worsened by the presence of chlorine which increases
the mobility of inorganic compounds. Also, chlorine is absorbed by metals at high
temperatures, rather than just building up on surfaces, and so results in corrosion.
The ash that remains after a material is burned is indicative of the mineral content, i.e.
Na, K, etc. Ash is easily measured by burning the material completely and weighing the
sample before and after. Hence, much more data is available on ash content than on
specific chemical contents. Low ash content also reduces disposal costs, assuming the
ash isn‘t put to a useful purpose such as a soil amendment or cement additive.
Gasifiers especially for straw and other biofuels with high alkali and chlorine contents
have been developed. Fluidized bed gasifiers are in general better suited for these
materials due to their lower operating temperatures. Foster Wheeler and Energi E2
performed successful pilot projects gasifying straw in a fluidized bed gasifier 1999 to
2001. The Purox gasifier, designed for gasification of municipal solid waste, operates in
―slagging mode‖ in which all the ash is melted on a hearth. The gasifier developed by
Taylor Biomass Energy being demonstrated at the Gady Farm in Spokane, Washington,
is also designed especially for straws and grasses.

25

Table 6. Typical Heating Value, Moisture Content and Ash Content of
Selected Biomass Feedstocks
Higher Heating
Value
(Btu/lb)
Corn Stover

7,700 to 8,000

Grape Pomace Pellets
Coal
Wood:
Logging Residue
Land Clearing Debris
Clean Wood, temperate zones
Bark
Straw
Switchgrass

8,300
10,000 to 14,000

Moisture
Content
(%)
Dry: 7 to 30
Moist: 50 to 65
14
12

7,000 to 10,000

Dry: 10 to 12
Moist: 40 to 60

8,000 to 10,000
7,500
8,000 to 8,200

30 to 60
15
15 to 20

Ash
%, dry basis
6 to 13
6
8 to 14
4
8
0.1 to 1
3 to 8
6 to 10
3 to 8

Sources:
1. Energy Research Centre of the Netherlands, ―Phyllis Database‖, http://www.ecn.nl/phyllis/
2. Krzysztof J., Ptasinski, Mark J., Prins and Anke Pierik , ―Exergetic evaluation of biomass gasification,‖
Energy, Volume 32, Issue 4, April 2007, Pages 568-574
3. Savoie, P. and S. Descôteaux, ―Artificial drying of corn stover in mid-size bales‖, Canadian Biosystems
Engineering, Volume 46 2004, http://engrwww.usask.ca/oldsite/societies/csae/protectedpapers/c0418.pdf
4. Ragland, Kenneth W. and Andrew J. Baker, ―Mineral Matter in Coal and Wood-Replications for Solid
Fueled Gas Turbines‖ University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI and U.S. Forest Products Laboratory,
Madison, WI, http://www.fpl.fs.fed.us/documnts/pdf1987/ragla87a.pdf
5. RGW Enterprises, ―Clean Energy and Environment Project Feasibility Study‖, Richland, Washington,
July 2007
6. U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Office, ―Biomass Feedstock
Composition and Property Database‖, http://www.eere.energy.gov/biomass/feedstock_databases.html
7. U.S. Department of Energy, Energy Efficiency and Renewable Energy Office, ―Biomass Energy Data
Book, Appendix B‖, http://cta.ornl.gov/bedb/appendix_b/Bioenergy_Feedstock_Characteristics.xls
8. Van Loo, Sjaak, and Jaap Koppejan, ―The Handbook of Biomass Combustion and Co-Firing,‖
Earthscan Publishing, London, 2008.

26

Table 7. Characteristics of Common Biomass Feedstocks
Crop Residues

Poultry Litter

Herbaceous Biomass
(Switchgrass,
Miscanthus, Reed
canary grass, Johnson
grass)
Forest Residues

Woody Biomass
(Hybrid poplar, Black
locust, Maple, Willow,
Short rotation woody
crops)

Ash content: 5% to15 by weight
High in silica and potassium (K)
Slagging problems at high gasification temperatures (>900°C)
Clinker formation
Reduce slagging and clinker formation by K removal and
feedstock washing
Ash content: 15% to 20% by weight
High in Silica and K
Very high slagging properties
Secondary reactions creating cyanide gas
High ash
High in silica and K

High lignin content, and therefore high tar production
High in ash due to soil contamination
Low K and therefore less slagging potential
High in particulate matter
Low ash content
Low in silica and K
Minimal slagging problems
High cost of production as an energy crop

From:
http://www.mawaterquality.org/conferences/biofuels/Agblevor_Biofuels_and_Water%20Quality.Beltsville.
2007.pdf

Table 8. Chemical Contents of Product Gas from Selected Biomass Fuels
C
%
51
54
49
49
50

H2
%
6.3
6.1
6.3
6.3
6.3

S
%
0.02
0.1
0.03
0.1
0.3

O2
%
42
40
44
43
43

N2
%
0.1
0.5
0.4
0.5
0.8

Ash
%
0.3
4
2
5
5

Cl
%
0.01
0.02
0.01
0.4
0.5

Na
(mg/kg)
20
300

Wood, coniferous
Bark, coniferous
Poplar
Straw, Wheat, Rye, Barley
500
Straw, Rape
500
Reed canary grass,
49
6.1
0.2
43
6.4
200
1.4
0.6
summer harvest
Reed canary grass,
49
5.8
0.1
44
0.9
5.6
0.1
200
delayed harvest
From: http://www.ncp.fi/koulutusohjelmat/metsa/5eures/2Training/2_CHP_shulkkonenl.pdf.
* Values in red indicate problematic feedstocks.

27

K
(mg/kg)
400
2,000
3,000
10,000
10,000
12,000
2,700

Comparison of Coal and Biomass
Coal and biomass have very different properties and each presents different challenges
and advantages. There is much more experience gasifying coal than gasifying biomass
and conventional designs for coal have often been troublesome when used with 100%
biomass.
Compared to coal, biomass fuels have varying chemical content, so each type of biomass
must be considered separately. But several generalizations can be made. Sulfur and ash
is typically lower in biomass, but alkali metal content and silica content, which lead to
slagging, is often greater in biomass. Volatile matter is generally much greater in
biomass. At the low end, volatile matter comprises only about 5% of anthracite coal,
while wood contains more than 75%. Therefore, wood is more easily converted to gas
and produces less char but more tar. Efficient use of char within the gasifier is more
important in coal gasification.
Biomass can be co-fired with coal in conventional gasifiers. The Tampa Electric Polk
Power Station, for example, co-fires 5% biomass in its slurry-fed Texaco gasifier to
generate 260 MWe without any major problems. The Dernkolec Power Plant in
Buggenum, Netherlands, co-fires 34% biomass with coal in a Shell gasifier to produce
250 MWe of electricity. Their biomass has included sewage sludge, chicken litter, and
wood waste.
Table 9 compares typical characteristics of biomass to those of coal.
Table 9. Biomass Characteristics As Compared to Coal
Volatile matter content
Oxygen content
Sulfur content
Ash content
Alkali metal content
Hydrogen to Carbon Ratio
Heating value
Tar reactivity

Greater
Greater
Lower
Lower
Greater, especially for agricultural wastes
Greater
Lower
Greater for woody biomass

28

Reducing Slagging, Fouling and Corrosion
Combustion and gasification of biomass feedstocks have been more challenging than
with coal in part due to problems with slagging, fouling and corrosion. Slagging occurs
when ash and other components of the reaction gases melt and condense on surfaces.
Fouling refers to deposits that build up on surfaces, but have not melted. Strategies for
reducing slagging, fouling and corrosion problems in biomass boilers include use of fuel
pretreatment, automatic surface cleaning, temperature control, and feedstock selection.
Slagging and fouling problems will be similar in nature in both biomass boilers and
gasifiers. Therefore, references on problems in biomass combustion can be useful in
considering potential problems and their solutions in gasification.

Fuel Management
Fuel management strategies for reducing slagging, fouling and corrosion include using
fuel additives, washing the feedstock, and screening dirty fuels. Some feedstocks may
need to be avoided altogether or mixed with less problematic fuels.

Fuel Additives
Fuel additives including limestone, clays, and minerals based on calcium, magnesium
and/or iron have been used to reduce slagging in biopower combustion appliances.
Examples are magnesium oxide, dolomite, kaolin, kaolinite, clinochlore, and ankerite.
Such additives have been shown to be effective particularly in fluidized-bed boilers,
which have good mixing. These materials may also be used effectively as bed
materials.
One commercial additive that reduces ash fouling in biomass power plants is
―CoMate‖ produced by Atlantic Combustion Technologies
(http://www.atlcombustion.com ). CoMate is not mixed with the fuel, but added
directly to the unit on its own in a dedicated feeder. Site ports can be taken advantage
of for inlets.

Washing
Washing straw has been shown to reduce its amount of chlorine and potassium
significantly and so reduces problems with slagging and fouling. Washing can be
accomplished by controlled washing or by simply leaving the straw on the field for a
time after harvest, exposing it to rain (―gray straw‖). Some organic material will also
be leached out. In a Danish study, the energy losses associated with controlled
washing, drying and leaching of organic matter amounted to approximately 8% of the
calorific content of the straw. This cost was offset by the prolonged life of the
boilers.

29

Screening
Trommel screening dirty fuels can dramatically decrease ash and slagging problems
in plants that burn field and urban wood residues. In wood fuels, screening out fines
reduces problems because ash-forming elements tend to be concentrated in the
smaller particles.

Reducing Problematic Fuels
Dirty or problematic fuels can be mixed with cleaner burning fuels to reduce fouling.
For example, nuts, shells and straws might be limited to less than 5% to 10% of the
fuel mix. It is important to avoid using feedstocks, especially grasses and straws, in a
gasifier for which it was not designed.

Temperature Control
Temperature can be used to control deposits to a certain extent, especially as a short term
or intermittent solution. Slagging can be avoided by operating the gasifier in one of two
temperature regimes:



Low temperature operation that keeps the temperature well below the flow
temperature of the ash.
High temperature operation that keeps the temperature above the melting point of ash.

In addition, gas streams throughout the system should be maintained above the dew
points of its corrosive contents. In particular, sulfur and chlorine result in low
temperature corrosion if they are allowed to condense out on surfaces.
Reducing temperature to control deposits also reduces the capacity and can have
undesirable economic consequences.

System Design
Certain system design options reduce the potential for fouling and corrosion. These
include:

Corrosion-Resistant Materials
When selecting materials for components that will come in contact with reaction
gases in or downstream of the gasifier, to avoid corrosion choose high chromium
stainless steels, such as AC66.

Automatic Surface Cleaning
The system should include some method of automatic surface cleaning, such as using
sootblowers, acoustic horns or pulse detonation systems.
Acoustic or sonic horns use relatively intense sound pressure to dislodge particulates.
They have been used over the last 15 years to clean dry particulate deposits from a
30

variety of equipment, including boilers, economizers, ducts, fans, hoppers, cargo
holds, dryers, electrostatic precipitators, and bag filters. Sonic horns are not effective
in removing non-particulate accumulation, such as sintered ash. Acoustic horns are
omni-directional, and so can clean hard to reach areas, in contrast to conventional
sootblowers.
The advantages of acoustic horns over sootblowers are illustrated in the article ―SCR
Catalyst Cleaning: Sootblowers vs. Acoustic Horns‖ in Power Engineering magazine,
available at:
http://pepei.pennnet.com/display_article/176817/6/ARTCL/none/none/1/SCRCatalyst-Cleaning:Sootblowers-vs-Acoustic-Horns/
…acoustic horns are relatively inexpensive (one-fourth the cost of a steam
sootblower), don't require structural steel for support, and have only one
moving part, a titanium diaphragm that might need to be replaced after three
to five years. The acoustic horns operate on standard plant compressed air,
and 70-90 psi air plumbing is all that is required to make them operational.
(Solenoids are used to fire the horns; from the solenoid to the horn, flex hose
is usually used.)
Another option is pulse detonation, which employs a detonation-initiated blast wave
to break up and remove deposits from surfaces. An advantage of pulse detonation
over both acoustic horns and sootblowers is the ability to remove harder deposits.
Each pulse detonation combustor can clean a relatively large area and reach areas that
are inaccessible to conventional sootblowers.
For more information, refer to ―A Comparison of Online Backpass Cleaning
Technologies: Detonation, Acoustic and Conventional Steam or Air Sootblowing‖
http://topics.energycentral.com/centers/gentech/view/detail.cfm?aid=1513.

31

Gas Clean-Up
The major contaminants produced during gasification are particulates, alkali compounds,
tars and char, nitrogen containing compounds, and sulfur. Gas cleaning is required
before use in engines and turbines, but little or no gas cleaning is required for burner
applications. Tars can clog engine valves, cause deposition on turbine blades or fouling
of a turbine system leading to decreased performance and increased maintenance. In
addition, tars interfere with synthesis of fuels and chemicals from syngas.
For more information on gas cleaning technologies, refer to:
―Initial Review and Evaluation of Process Technologies and Systems Suitable for
Cost-Efficient Medium-Scale Gasification for Biomass to Liquid Fuels‖ (Olafsson
et al. 2005)
―The Handbook of Biomass Combustion & Co-Firing‖ (Van Loo et al. 2008)
―Biomass Gasifier Tars: Their Nature, Formation and Conversion‖ (Milne et al
1998)
―Gasification Technologies: A Primer for Engineers and Scientists‖ (Rezaiyan
and Cheremisinoff 2005)

Particulate Removal
Gas emerging from gasifiers may contain particulates consisting of ash, char, and (for
fluidized bed gasifiers) bed materials. Particulate control technologies include cyclones,
electrostatic filters, bag filters, spray changers, and impingement scrubbers. For nonsticky particles larger than about 5 mm, a cyclone separator is the best choice. For
particles smaller than 5 mm, normally electrostatic filters, bag filters and scrubbers are
used.

Tar Content and Removal
The type of system used for tar removal depends on the quality of the gas produced by
the gasifier. Syngas from most downdraft gasifiers typically does not have high tar
content. In fact, downdraft gasifiers were developed specifically to minimize tar. In
contrast, the syngas of updraft gasifiers can contain about 100 times more tar than that of
downdraft gasifiers. Fluidized bed gasifiers can produce low tar content product gas,
largely depending on the bed material, as discussed below. Typical tar contents of gas
produced by gasifier type are shown in Table 10.
In addition to gasifier type, feedstock strongly influences tar content of the product gas.
Woody biomass in particular results in high tar content syngas. Agricultural and food
wastes tend to have lower tar contents.
The requirement for tar removal also depends on the end use of the syngas. Burners have
higher tolerance for tar than engines, which in turn have higher tolerance than turbines, as
32

shown in Table 11. Syngas from downdraft gasifiers has been used successfully with
internal combustion engines to generate power without significant tar removal. For
example, Community Power Corporation‘s Biomax syngas only requires separation and
filtration of particulates before use in a reciprocating engine, which removes much of the
tars as well (http://ieeexplore.ieee.org/stamp/stamp.jsp?arnumber=01373153).
In general, tar is removed from the product gas by chemical or physical methods or by
condensation. Chemical methods are catalytic cracking, thermal cracking, plasma
reactors and use of catalytic beds. Physical methods are cyclones, filters, electrostatic
precipitators and scrubbers. Condensation is accomplished by cooling the gas.
Using physical methods, sticky particles such as tars are usually collected in a liquid, as
in a scrubber or in a cyclone, bag filter or electrostatic filter whose collecting surfaces are
continually coated with a film of flowing liquid. The gasification project in Harboore,
Denmark, discussed in the section ―Demonstration Projects,‖ uses gas cooling and a wet
electrostatic precipitator. The Moissannes project in France (also discussed in
―Demonstration Projects‖) uses the ―OLGA‖ tar removal method, which uses an oil
solvent to collect and absorb tars instead of water. For information on the OLGA tar
removal method, refer to ―Tar Removal from Biomass Product Gas: Development and
Optimisation of the OLGA tar removal technology‖ (Boerrigter et al. 2005) available at
http://www.ecn.nl/docs/library/report/2005/rx05186.pdf.
In fluidized bed gasifiers, the bed materials can serve as a catalyst for tar reduction.
Clay-derived materials, including activated clay, acidified bentonite, and clay housebrick,
have worked well for this purpose. Ordinary clay housebrick captures more than twice
that by sand. On the other hand, some bed materials – notably dolomite and limestone,
but not magnesite – will recarbonate during cool down, which results in fouling and
deposits will occur in different locations in the gasifier system and in downstream
systems. In the fluidized bed gasifier in the demonstration project at Varnamo, Sweden,
magnesite was chosen as the bed material to obtain a low tar content gas.
Low tar gases produced by most downdraft gasifiers can be treated with a ceramic fiber
filter followed by condensation and perhaps by a scrubber. Biomass Engineering, Ltd. in
the UK has used this approach in 250 kWe modules. Filters manufactured by Glosfume
(UK, http://www.glosfume.com/) have been used for downdraft gasifiers at the 100 kWe
scale. (Refer to Fluidyne‘s "Californian Mk5 Andes Class Gasifier,‖ August 2009
http://www.fluidynenz.250x.com/August2009/Cm5.html.)
High tar gases produced by updraft gasifiers or many fluidized bed gasifiers may use
particulate filtration followed by condensation. Condensation systems used in many
Indian gasifiers consist of direct contact with water followed by packed bed filters.
GTI/Carbona‘s fluidized bed gasifiers (3 MWe and greater) use a ceramic filter as a
reactive surface and filter. Tars pass through the filter and are reformed downstream.
The proprietary OLGA system developed by ECN and marketed by Dahlman uses
organic solvents to remove tars. The OLGA system has been demonstrated at PRM
Energy‘s 1.0 MWe system at Moissannes, France where cleaned syngas is burned in a
33

Caterpillar engine. The OLGA system is generally not cost effective for projects less
than about 1 MWe in size.
Envitech (http://www.envitechinc.com/) designed scrubbers for a 1 MWe fixed bed
updraft gasifier for a demonstration project in Limoge, France. They also designed the
320 kWe Tallon Lumber project
(http://www.envitechinc.com/biomass_gasifier_scrubber/).
Several manufacturers are in the process of developing or have developed proprietary tar
removal systems. For example, Nexterra has developed a thermal cracking method to
achieve engine grade syngas that is approved for use in GE Jenbacher reciprocating
engines. Nexterra has signed a strategic alliance agreement with GE Energy to
commercialize this application and will be starting a commercial demonstration at a
university in British Columbia, Canada.
Table 10. Typical Tar and Particulate Contents of Gasifier Types
Gasifier Type
Downdraft fixed bed
Updraft fixed bed
Bubbling
fluidized bed
Circulating
fluidized bed

Tar Content
(g/Nm3)
~1
Typically 0.5, ranging from 0.02 to 4
~100,
Typically ranging from 20 to 100
~10,
Typically ranging from 1 to 15
~10,
Typically ranging from 1 to 15

Particulate Content
(g/Nm3)
0.1 to 0.2
0.1 to 1.0
2 to 20
10 to 35

Table 11. Tolerance of End-Use Devices for Tar*
End-Use

Limits (g/Nm3)**

Combustion
Large
Internal Combustion Engines
0.010 to 0.100
Gas Turbines
0.0005 to 0.005
Compressors
0.050 to 0.500
Fuel Cells
Very low
* From http://www.nrel.gov/docs/fy99osti/25357.pdf
** mg/Nm3 is ―mg per normal cubic meters‖. Normal conditions are 0°C and a pressure
of 1.013 bar.

34

Marketable Co-Products
The wide array of co-products possible with gasification can improve the cost
effectiveness of a gasification project. While combustion produces only heat,
gasification can be used to produce heat, as well as syngas and solid carbon char or
―biochar.‖ Syngas can be used as a feedstock to produce hydrogen and liquid
hydrocarbons, such as ethanol and chemical feedstocks. Biochar has several potential
uses and gives gasification the potential of a carbon neutral or carbon negative energy
solution. Both combustion and gasification produce ash, which also can be marketed.

Markets for Biochar
Biochar is a fine-grained charcoal composed primarily of organic carbon (75% to 85%).
Production of biochar is significant in downdraft gasifiers in particular. It is also
produced in even larger quantities in pyrolysis, 10% to 15% in fast pyrolysis and as much
as 35% in slow pyrolysis.
Biomass-based carbon, especially from wood, has a long history of uses for its
adsorption, thermal and electrical properties. Activated carbon is used in filtration media.
In the metallurgical industry it is used to reduce the iron ore in pig iron, in stainless steel,
and in the production of some metal alloys. Carbon black is used as an electrically
conductive additive in batteries.
Coke, which is essentially coal charcoal, is now used for most applications formerly
served by wood products. The only significant markets for wood carbonization products
in the U.S. at present are activated carbons and charcoal briquettes. However, an
economic incentive to switch back from coke to wood char can be expected in the near
future driven by the implementation of carbon taxes and/or carbon cap-and-trade systems,
as well as by the existing, growing markets in carbon offsets. Already switching from
charcoal to coke in Brazil‘s steel industry is being discouraged in projects implemented
under the Clean Development Mechanism of the Kyoto Protocol.
The char produced in gasification and pyrolysis generally contains a significant quantity
of impurities. Biochar can be considered a low grade carbon black. For many
applications, the char would need to be upgraded to remove impurities, diminishing its
economic value.

Biochar Soil Amendment
As a soil amendment, biochar improves soil texture, holds moisture and releases
fertilizer slowly. Biochar resists decomposition, so it persists in the soil. It also
sequesters carbon in the soil and so helps to mitigate global warming.

35

Activated Carbon Precursor
Biochar has high value as a precursor for activated carbon. Activated carbon is
produced from charcoal by exposing it to high temperatures in an airless
environment. It is then treated with oxygen, which opens up tiny pores between the
carbon atoms, resulting in very high surface area per volume of material.

Solid Fuel
Biochar can be reburned as a solid fuel in the gasifier itself. In fluidized bed systems,
char in the gas may be captured in a cyclone and returned to the bottom of the bed.
Alternatively, char may also be removed from the bottom of the gasifier and used
elsewhere.

Steel Manufacturing Reductant
Until the 20th century charcoal was widely used in the steel industry. Now Brazil is
the only country where charcoal is still predominant over coke in steel manufacturing.
Use of charcoal as a reductant in steel manufacturing significantly reduces
greenhouse gas emissions, decreases emissions of sulfur dioxide, oxides of nitrogen
and results in improved steel quality.
On the small scale, some blacksmiths are promoting the use of wood charcoal over
coal in their forging operations, despite certain advantages of coke (easy ignition,
hotter flame, energy efficiency). Reasons for the switch are that wood charcoal burns
more cleanly, results in fewer health hazards to the blacksmith, presents less of a
disposal problem, and is a renewable resource.

Markets for Ash
Ash has markets as a soil amendment, cement additive, steel industry tundish powder,
and sand replacement.

Soil Amendment
Biomass ash may be added to fertilizers as a soil amendment, unlike coal ash which
may contain toxic metals and other contaminants. Biomass ash can be a significant
source of potassium, calcium, magnesium, sodium and sulfur. Ash contains
phosphorous, also, but it is present in a form that has very poor soil solubility. The
slow release of phosphorous may not be a problem if used as a fertilizer for
perennials such as trees.
Care must be taken to ensure that the biomass is not contaminated by, for example,
paints and wood preservatives. Biomass from household, industrial and municipal
solid wastes may contain organic pollutants and heavy metals. Heavy metals that
may be in contaminated biomass include cadmium, zinc and arsenic. In addition,
biomass ashes are less attractive in commercial fertilizers than mineral sources
because their mineral content per volume is lower.

36

Steel Industry Tundish Powder
Rice hull ash has been used widely in steel mills as a tundish power, which serves as
an insulating cover on tundishes and ladles containing molten steel. Rice hull ash
flows over and covers the steel surface well and does not crust or cause metal sculls
during use.

Cement Additive
Biomass ash can be used in certain cement blends, mortars and aggregates. If it does
not contain aggregates such as slag and clinkers, it often can be recycled to cement
kilns without prior treatment. Biomass fly ash often contains alkali metals, chlorine
and phosphates that can make it unsuitable for concrete. The fly ash of each type of
biomass must be analyzed to evaluate its suitability.
Rice hull ash (RHA) in particular has been used in the cement industry in the
manufacture of low cost building blocks and in the production of high quality cement.
At 35% replacement, RHA cement has improved compressive strength due to its
higher percentage of silica. It also has improved resistance to acid attack compared to
Portland cement. Replacing 10% Portland cement with RHA can improve resistance
to chloride penetration, which has application in the marine environment.
Several studies have combined fly ash and RHA in various proportions. In general,
concrete made with Portland cement containing both RHA and fly ash has a higher
compressive strength than concrete made with Portland cement containing either
RHA or fly ash on their own.

Sand Replacement
If sand is used as a bed material in fluidized bed gasifiers, bottom ashes will consist
largely of sand and can be used to replace the sand used in road construction and
landscaping.

Solid Fuel
Fly ashes may also contain significant quantities of carbon (>35% by weight) and so
can be reburned as fuel. Fly ash can be pelletized for this purpose by adding water
and/or a binder.

Chemical Feedstocks
A very large number of chemicals can be produced from syngas. Those with the largest
markets include ethanol, methanol, naptha, gasoline, diesel, hydrogen, acetic acid,
dimethyl ether, and ammonia. As an illustration of the potential, syngas from coal and
natural gas is currently used to manufacture 30% of the gasoline and diesel used in South
Africa.

37

For the production of chemicals, syngas that is undiluted with nitrogen must be used.
This means it must be oxygen-blown or heated indirectly. Also, the methane content of
the gas should be low.

Bio-Hydrogen
Bio-hydrogen can be produced from biomass by several processes. Of these, gasification
coupled with water gas shift is a mature commercial process with only small adaptations
required for application to biomass. This process is currently near cost competitive with
production of hydrogen by steam reforming of methane, depending on relative costs of
natural gas and biomass.
Hydrogen can be used in either internal combustion engines or fuel cells. Since fuel cell
vehicles are not commercially available yet and a distribution infrastructure for hydrogen
will not be realized in the short term, bio-hydrogen is considered a longer-term option for
the transport sector.

38

Environmental Benefits
Environmental benefits of biomass gasification compared to combustion of solid biomass
may include:
Reduced carbon emissions by improvements in energy efficiency
Reduced carbon emissions by closing the carbon cycle and carbon sequestration
Reduced NOx emissions
Reduced use of fertilizers and runoff of nutrients from soils amended with
Biochar

Reduced Carbon Emissions by Efficiency Improvements
As discussed previously, gasification has potential to increase energy efficiency
compared to combustion of biomass in a steam cycle. These carbon emission reductions
may be tradable in carbon offset markets.
Significant production of biochar reduces energy efficiency, if the char is not reburned.
But biochar offers other environmental advantages that can more than make up for its
energy efficiency penalty, as discussed below.

Reduced Carbon Emissions by Closing the Carbon Cycle and
Carbon Sequestration
Both fossil fuels and biomass release carbon dioxide when they burn. The carbon
released when burning fossil fuels originates from oil reserves, not from the atmosphere.
Hence, fossil fuels are carbon positive in that they add new carbon dioxide to the
atmosphere. In contrast, combustion of biomass, taken by itself, is carbon neutral
because the carbon released was first absorbed from the atmosphere by the biomass as it
grew. In other words, the carbon cycle is closed. Combustion of biomass may still be
carbon positive overall if fossil fuels are used in their production and transportation.
Use of biomass has the potential of being carbon negative if, in using or producing it,
carbon is stored in a form that is not released to the atmosphere. As one example,
constructing a building of wood stores carbon in the structure for as long as the building
is maintained. As another example, grasses tend to build up carbonaceous material in the
soil as they grow. Using biochar produced in the gasification process as a soil
amendment is a third example.
Biochar is largely resistant to decomposition and, once put in the soil, most of it remains
there orders of magnitude longer than other organic amendments. This effectively
absorbs carbon from the atmosphere and stores it in the soil.
For more information on the environmental benefits of biochar, refer to the website of the
International Biochar Initiative at http://www.biochar-international.org.
39

Reduced Fertilizer Use and Runoff in Biochar-Amended Soils
Biochar as a soil amendment significantly increases the efficiency of and reduces the
need for traditional chemical fertilizers, while greatly enhancing crop yields. Production
and transportation of chemical fertilizers is fossil fuel intensive and so reducing their use
reduces associated carbon emissions. Moreover, char-amended soils have shown 50% to
80% reductions in nitrous oxide emissions, reduced runoff of phosphorus into surface
waters, and reduced leaching of nitrogen into groundwater.

Reduced NOx Emissions
The product gas will generally have low NOx concentrations because gasification
temperatures are not high enough to produce NOx in significant quantities. However,
when the product gas is burned in a boiler, turbine or engine, NOx will be produced as it
is in most combustion systems and with all fuels. Nevertheless, it is easier to control the
combustion of a gaseous fuel than the combustion of a solid fuel. Better control of
combustion provides the opportunity to reduce NOx formation.

40

Industry Applications
Pulp and Paper Industry
The pulp and paper industry is a prime candidate for implementation of gasification for a
number of reasons. The industry is seeking alternative products to help improve the
economics of the paper-making. The industry already has a supply of woody feedstocks
with the infrastructure necessary to handle them and has wide experience with wood-fired
combined heat and power. The scale of pulp and paper plants is conducive to
implementation of forest biorefineries. Aging wood-fired boilers in need of replacement
might be considered for replacement with gasifiers.
Besides production of chemical feedstocks, syngas can be used to offset natural gas use
in, for example, lime kilns as in the Domtar draft pulp mill in Kamloops, BC, which uses
a Nexterra updraft gasifier with hog fuel. Start up of the full-scale commercial operation
of this project is expected in June 2009.

Wood Products Industry
The waste wood available in lumber mills, cabinet shops, plywood plants and other wood
products facilities can be gasified to generate electricity for onsite use and sale to the grid
with heat recovered for process heat. Examples of process heating needs are lumber
drying, veneer drying, and hot water for log conditioning. Projects are operating or in
development at Tallon Lumber in North Canaan, Connecticut, Tolko Industries in
Heffley Creek, British Columbia, and the Grand Forks Truss Plant in Grand Forks, North
Dakota.

Petroleum and Petrochemical Industries
Petroleum refineries and many petrochemical facilities have existing infrastructure that
can be used in the production and/or upgrade of biofuels. The petroleum industry has
become interested in biofuels largely because of recent mandatory requirements for
blending of biofuels with gasoline and diesel being implemented in a number of countries
and U.S. states.

Food Processing Industries and Agriculture
Facilities processing dry foods or having relatively dry wastes are candidates for
gasification. Examples of feedstocks that have been used include grape pomace, olive
waste, rice hulls, grass and straw, distillery grain, and corn stover. The Port of Benton
gasification project at the FruitSmart facility in Prosser, Washington, demonstrated the
feasibility of using grape pomace to offset propane use in fruit dryers.

41

Demonstration Projects
There are many biomass gasifiers currently operating or planned in industrial applications
in North America, Europe and Asia. Examples in North America and Europe are
summarized in Tables 12 and 13, although this list is not all inclusive.

Small-Scale U.S. Demonstration Projects
There are many small-scale biomass gasification projects of less than 1 MWe in various
phases located around the world. In the U.S. small-scale projects include the following:

Mount Wachusett Community College – Gardner, Massachusetts
Mount Wachusett Community College has been gasifying wood chips to generate
electricity and meet campus space heating and cooling needs since October 2006.
The gasifier is a 50 kW Biomax with an 8.1 liter GM turbocharged engine and genset.
The feedstock is 1.5 tons per day of green wood chips. The system is operated 24
hours per day, 6 days per week.

Tallon Lumber – North Canaan, Connecticut
The Tallon Lumber sawmill biomass gasification project will use a
downdraft gasifier and engine to generate 320 kW of electricity and 1800
MMBtu/h of heat at a midsize sawmill in North Canaan, Connecticut.
Sawmill waste residue consisting of wood chips and sawdust will fuel
the gasifier. The system is designed to satisfy the plant‘s peak electrical
demand, the peak thermal demand of the kiln, and space heat for the
planer building. The startup testing and system shakedown is planned
for the first quarter of 2009.
The gasifier and generator were originally commissioned in 2005. However, after
running the plant for only 53 hours, it was decided clean up of tars in the gas needed
improvement. The original electrostatic precipitator was replaced with a wet scrubber.
The Connecticut Clean Energy Fund Project Status Quarterly Update summarized the
status of the project as of the end of 2008:
In Q4 of 2007, Kraftpower performed an inspection of the Schmitt
Engine, performed service, and ran the engine in order to ensure
proper function and readiness for the next stage in facility start-up.
The Envitech venturi scrubber was installed in May 2008. The
rotary airlock, which will automatically remove ash and char
material produced by the gasifier, was also installed. Once the
system was assembled, it was tested for two hours.

42

A new radiator was installed when higher heat output was generated
from the new configuration. The plant was tested and determined to
adequately remove particulates from the gas stream.
However, the engine generator developed software problems that
need to be resolved before a complete system shakedown occurs.
Schmitt Enertec and Kraftwork have been contacted to resolve the
issues by February 2009. The plant will then undergo a full test run.

Port of Benton / FruitSmart – Prosser, Washington
A short-term pilot project was conducted in 2006 by the Port of Benton at the
FruitSmart food processing facility near Prosser, Washington. Different
combinations of wood pellets, sawdust and chips, mint residue, grape pomace, spent
hops, cow manure, wheat straw, and waste glycerin from a nearby biodiesel plant –
60 tons total – were pelletized and gasified in a downdraft gasifier. The producer gas
supplemented propane use in an industrial drying operation, offsetting 40% of
FruitSmart‘s propane costs. As could be expected, gasification of the wheat straw
was problematic. Slagging occurred and the heat exchanger was punctured in an
attempt to chip off the slag.
Steps toward a permanent demonstration project with pellet mill are underway. The
port‘s long term goals are to use gasification to offset fossil fuels for industries within
the port district and encourage a manufacturing facility for the production of gasifiers.
Funding for this project has been included in a federal appropriation bill that is
awaiting passage. The design is complete, but the project is on hold until the funding
is released.

Gady Farm – Spokane, Washington
A one-year pilot project at the Gady Farm has begun operation to demonstrate the
gasification of grass straw, a notoriously troublesome feedstock. The dual-stage
gasifier developed by Taylor Biomass Energy (www.taylorbiomassenergy.com) and
the Western Research Institute (WRI) is designed specifically to minimize problems
associated with gasifying straw. The pilot gasifier will process 500 to 2000 pounds
per hour of grass straw. The syngas, after cleaning, is being used to generate
electricity using a 300 kW reciprocating engine/generator. Existing farm equipment
will be utilized to collect, chop and pelletize, and store the straw, and convey it to the
gasification reactor.
Farm Power, the project‘s developer, also plans to contract with WRI to develop
ancillary technology to convert syngas into liquid fuel and to test this technology on
the farm. It is estimated that 60 gallons of fuel could be synthesized from a ton of
straw. Pacific Northwest farmers generate 10 million tons of waste straw annually,
which is sufficient to provide 420 million gallons of liquid fuel or approximately 8%
of the region‘s transportation fuel usage.

43

This project illustrates the benefits of choosing a scale that is appropriate for use at
the source of the feedstock, which reduces collection costs, as described in ―Grass
straw gasifier ready to fire up‖ by Scott Yates in Capital Press
(http://www.capitalpress.info/main.asp?SectionID=67&SubSectionID=617&ArticleI
D=38915&TM=66134.16):
Costs of straw collection and transportation make long distance shipment to
large, centralized conversion facilities uneconomical. Development of on-farmscale technologies for conversion of this biomass to energy provides the potential
to develop a distributed network for power and liquid fuel production in rural
communities.
This pilot project is supported by a $750,000 U.S. Department of Energy grant in
cooperation with the U.S. Department of Agriculture‘s Agricultural Research Service,
the Pacific Northwest National Laboratory and the Bonneville Power Administration.
The project developer is Farm Power. Inland Power & Light will purchase electricity
that is not used on site through a net metering agreement. The project is composed of
three tasks: development of feedstock, processing, handling and storage cost
estimates; gasifier system development; and on-farm testing of the resulting
gasification and power generation system.
The Taylor gasifier used in this project is similar to the FERCO SilvaGas gasifier
described above in that it has two chambers, one for gasification and the other for
combustion, with a fluidized bed medium that circulates between the two chambers.
In the Taylor gasifier, gasification of the straw takes place in the annulus between an
outer tube and an inner (draft) tube. Char remaining after the gasification – plus
supplemental fuel – are oxidized with air within the inner draft tube to generate the
energy needed for gasification in the outer tube. Heat is transferred from the inner
tube to the annular gasification section with the aid of steel balls that are
pneumatically conveyed by the combustion products. For more information on the
gasifier refer to ―Gasification of Kentucky bluegrass (Poa pratensis l.) straw in a
farm-scale reactor‖ (Boeteng et al. 2006).

Medium-Scale Demonstration Projects (1 MW and Greater)
There are many medium-scale biomass gasification projects in various phases located
around the world, as summarized in Tables 12 and 13. Numerous gasification projects
that do not burn the gas in engines or turbines have been in operation for decades. But
projects generating electricity in turbines and engines have much shorter histories.
Four projects are summarized here. The first two demonstrate successful gas clean-up
technology with generation of electricity by burning the product gas in an internal
combustion engine: the Babcock Wilcox gasifier in Harboore, Denmark, and the PRM
updraft gasifier in Moissanes, France. The 40 MWe Foster Wheeler fluidized bed
gasifier in Lahti, Finland, illustrates the potential to co-fire the product gas with other
fuels. The 40 MWe commercial-scale project in Tallahassee, Florida, will use an
44

indirectly heated steam gasifier. Construction on the Florida project will begin in early
2009.

Harboore, Denmark – Babcock & Wilcox Volund Gasifier with Wet
ESP Gas Clean-Up
At this 1.5 MWe project wood chips are gasified in an updraft gasifier. The gasifier
has been operating since 1994, providing district heating. Since 2005, it has also
been generating electricity by burning syngas in two gas engines.
Gas clean up is accomplished by cooling the gas and then passing it through a wet
electrostatic precipitator (ESP). Treating the tar-contaminated water from the wet
precipitator was problematic, but a successful solution has been developed.
The meeting notes of the International Energy Agency‘s Second Semiannual Task
Meeting held in October 2007 are available at
http://media.godashboard.com/gti/IEA_NL_DraftMinutes_1-08.pdf reported:
The 1.3 MWe capacity Harboore plant is in operation, producing 0.85 MWe, and
3.3 MWth district heat. During 2005, the gasifier has logged in 8200 hours and
the gas engine for 7619 hours, and in 2006, the gasifier has logged in 8146 hours
and the gas engine for 7947 hours. The Volund BMG technology is licensed to
JFE, a Japanese company which has built and successfully commissioned a 7.5
MWth plant in Japan, producing 2 MWe, employing the same gas cleaning as at
the Harboore plant. A second plant of 10 MWth is currently being planned to
produce 3 MWe. The wood tars may be used locally for sanitary applications.

Note that the capacity of this project has been increased to 1.5 MWe since this IEA
summary was written.

Moissannes, France – PRM Energy Gasifier with OLGA Gas CleanUp
At the commercial demonstration project located in Moissannes, France (near
Limoges), wood waste and distillery residue are gasified in a ―pseudo updraft‖
gasifier. Cleaned gas is burned in a Caterpillar engine to generate 1 MWe of power (4
MWth). This project was commissioned in 2006 as a demonstration for 6 future
commercial 12.5 MWe (40 MWth) plants. Despite good operation in 2006 and the
first part of 2007, the plant was not operated during most of 2007 and 2008 for
administrative reasons. The project‘s final permit included more stringent demands
than its initial temporary permit and required additional investments and downtime.
Optimization and duration tests are scheduled.
In this demonstration project (and in a 0.5 MWth pilot project that preceded the
demonstration) the syngas was successfully cleaned using the OLGA tar removal
process, previously described. Tar removal from the syngas has been a major
problem in updraft gasifiers.
45

Lahden Lämpövoima Oy -- Lahti, Finland
Producer gas is co-fired with coal at the Lahden Lämpövoima Oy‘s Kymijärvi power
plant at Lahti, Finland. Paper and textiles, wood and peat, as well as shredded tires,
plastics and municipal solid waste are gasified in a Foster Wheeler air-blown
circulating fluidized bed gasifier that was installed in 1997. The plant has a total
maximum capacity of 167 MWe. On an annual basis, approximately 15% of fuel
needs are met by gasification. Capital cost of the gasification plant was $15 million.
The hot product gas is led through an air preheater to two burners, which are located
below the coal burners in the boiler. The bottom ash extraction system was designed
to remove the non-combustibles from the municipal solid waste, as well as nails and
other metals from urban wood waste.
The gasifier has been in operation since 2002. Availability increased consistently in
the first few years and in 2005, 2006 and 2007, the gasifier was available more than
7000 hours of the year and the engine, more than 6000 hours.

Tallahassee Renewable Energy Center – Tallahassee, Florida
(Construction to Begin January 2009)
Biomass Gas & Electric (BGE) of Tallahassee will install an indirectly heated steam
gasifier using the SilvaGas process in this 42 MWe commercial-scale project. BGE
will sell both electricity and 60 million Btu‘s of methanated gas to the City of
Tallahassee‘s pipeline. Construction is proposed to commence by January 2009, with
a proposed in-service date by January 2011. The feedstock will be wood chips,
which will be screened and sized at a different location.

46

Table 12. Examples of European Biomass Gasification Projects
Location

End Use

Gasifier
Manufacturer

Gasifier Type

Electrical
Generation

Feedstock

Notes

Wood Chips

Operation of GE Jenbacher gas engines on
syngas began in 2005. Plant availability up
to 8000 hrs/year operation by 2006.
District heating has been provided for more
than 70,000 hours of operation between
1994 and 2005.

3 MWe

Wood chips

Planned

Fluidized bed

40 MWe

Peat, wood, tires and
trash

PRM Energy

Updraft.

1.0 MW

Wood and distillery
grain residue

Electricity

PRM Energy

Updraft

12.5 MWe

Wood and distillery
grain residue

Värnamo, Sweden

Electricity and
Liquid Fuels

Foster
Wheeler

IGCC

6 MWe

Wood chips

Gussing, Austria

Electricity,
mixed
alcohols, heat

Repotech

Circulating
Fluidized Bed

2 MWe

Local wood

Harboore, Denmark
- Demonstration

Electricity and
District Heat

Babcock &
Wilcox
Voland

Updraft

Harboore, Denmark
- Commercial

Electricity and
District Heat

Babcock &
Wilcox
Voland

Updraft

Lahti, Finland

Electricity and
District Heat

Foster
Wheeler

Moissannes, France
- Demonstration

Electricity

Moissannes, France
- Commercial Plant

1.5 MWe

47

A 200-megawatt coal-fired plant that
added a 40 MWe fluidized bed gasifier.
Successful operation.
Successful operation in 2006 and part of
2007, but not running now due to permit
problems. Uses the OLGA organic solvent
gas clean up.
Commercial scale 12.5 MWe project in
development.
Plant availability up to 6500 hours by
2005. Restarted in 2006 for condition
assessment with liquid fuel production
starting in 2007.
Plant availability up to 6500 hours of
operation by 2005. GE Jenbacher gas
engines. Beginning pilot of FischerTropsch synthesis to produce biodiesel and
syngas. Plans for a fuel cell.

Location

End Use

Gasifier
Manufacturer

Gasifier Type

Electrical
Generation

Feedstock

Notes
Operational in 2008. Design Based on
demonstration at Gussing. Electric
efficiency of 32%. GE Jenbacher gas
engine. Organic Rankine Cycle will
recover heat from gasifier to generate
electricity. Possibility of biomethane
production.
Operational since 2002. As of June 2008,
plant has 15,000 hours of run time on GE
Jenbacher gas engines.
Commissioned in late 2006. Start up of
one JMS 316 engine in 2004/2005 and two
more in 2005/2006. District heat output of
4.3 MWth. Fuel is dried to less than 30%
by waste heat from the existing Kokemäki
district heating plant.
Commissioning February 2008. Official
opening delayed until April 2009. GE
Jenbacher gas engines. Unique design of
tar cracker. Total investment cost is 30
million Euros. Expected pay-back time is
~10 years.

Oberwart, Austria

Electricity.
Biomethane

Repotech

Circulating
Fluidized Bed

2 .7 MWe

Wood

Spiez, Switzerland

Electricity

Pyroforce

Dual-zone
/Fixed bed
downdraft

200 kWe

Commercially
shredded wood

Kokemäki, Finland

Electricity and
District heat

Condens Oy /
Novel

Fluidized Bed

1.8MWe

Wood

Skive, Denmark

Electricity

Carbona

Fluidized bed

5.4 MWe

110 tpd Wood Pellets

Vario, Sweden

Co-firing
syngas in lime
kiln

Metso

CFB

Thermal Only

75 tpd bark

Operating since 1986.
35 MWth.

144 tpd olive waste

Operating since 2002 but in 2005
experimental tests were still on-going due
to gas clean-up problems. Six Guascor
gensets, model 560 FBLD.

Rossanno, Italy

Electricity

PRM

Updraft

4 MWe

48

Table 13. Examples of North American Biomass Gasification Projects
Location

Joseph C. McNeil
Generating Station
Burlington VT

End Use

Electricity

Gasifier
Manufacturer

Future Energy
Resources
Company
(Silvagas)

Gasifier
Type

Indirect
steam

Electrical
Generation

Feedstock

Status

7 MW

76 tons per hr forest
thinnings and waste
wood

Silvagas technology successfully
demonstrated in Phase 1 (1996 to 2001) in
which product gas was supplied to the
existing 50MWe biomass boiler, adding 6
to 7 MWe capacity. Phase 2 involving gas
clean-up and use of gas turbines was
stopped in 2001due to pending bankruptcy
of FERCO. FERCO Enterprises became
Silvagas in 2006.

28 MWe

Wood waste, sawmill
residue, and
herbaceous
agricultural waste
from adjacent land
fill

Planned as of August 2007. Will generate
electricity by steam cycle.

Biomass Gas and
Electric
Forsythe, GA

Electricity

Future Energy
Resources
Corporation

Biomass Gas and
Electric
Tallahassee, FL

Electricity.
Methanated
biogas

Future Energy
Resources
Corporation
(Silvagas)

Indirect
steam

42 MWe

Wood chips

Construction to begin January 2009. Will
use Silvagas technology demonstrated at
McNeil Generating Station. BG&E
estimates it can deliver electricity at 7
cents/kwh.

FruitSmart: short
term demo
Prosser WA

Syngas offset
propane use in
dryers.

CPC Biomax

Downdraft

Thermal Only

Various

Ended due to slagging of gasifier with
straw feedstock

Grape pomace

Planned demonstration of biomass
pelletization and gasification at Prosser
Wine and Food Park. Design complete but
put on hold waiting for funding. Project
has received a federal appropriation that
has not yet passed.

FruitSmart: long
term demo
Prosser WA

Electricity.

CPC Biomax

Updraft

Downdraft

500 kWe

49

Location

End Use

Gady Farm
Spokane, WA

Electricity.
Liquid fuels.

Gasifier
Manufacturer
Taylor
Biomass
Energy and
WRI

Gasifier
Type
Dual-bed
indirect air

Electrical
Generation

Feedstock

Status

Grass and straw

Cleaned product gas will be burned in
engine.

320 kW

Wood

Commissioning 2005 but operation
stopped due to gas clean-up problems.
Original electrostatic precipitator was
replaced with a venturi wet scrubber in
May 2008. The startup testing and system
shakedown is planned for the 1st quarter of
2009.

50 kW

1.5 tpd of green wood
chips

Operating
Reports that project was terminated due to
―feedstock problems‖. In 2007 the Biomax
25 unit was returned to CPC ―after not
living up to expectations.

300 kW

Tallon Lumber

Electricity for
on-site use and
sale. Heat for
lumber kiln.

Pudhas Energy

Mount Wachusett
Community College
Gardner, MA

Electricity,
Campus
heating &
cooling

CPC Biomax

Siskiyou
Opportunity Center
Mt Shasta, CA

Electricity

Community
Power Corp.
(CPC)

Downdraft

25 kW

Woodchips and
nutshells

Tolko plywood plant
Heffley Creek BC

Syngas for
drying kilns

Nexterra

Updraft

Thermal only
28 MMBtu/h

13,000 bone dry
tonnes per year of
wood residue

Successful operation producing 38
MMBtu/hr net useable heat

Updraft

Thermal Only
60 MMBtu/h

Hog fuel

Commercial scale project. Due to
economic conditions Domtar decided to
postpone project until pulp and paper
industry recovers.

Updraft

Thermal Only
8 MMBtu/h

Hog fuel

Successful 8 MMBtu/h pilot scale project
to demonstrate technology for commercial
scale project at the same site.

Domtar Paper Mill
Kamloops, BC
(Commercial
Project)

Domtar Paper Mill
Kamloops, BC
(Pilot Project)

Syngas for
lime kiln
(60 MMBtu/h)

Syngas for
lime kiln
(8 MMBtu/h)

Developers:
Nexterra,
Weyerhaeuser
and Paprican
(Now FP
Innovations)
Developers:
Nexterra,
Weyerhaeuser
and Paprican
(Now FP
Innovations)

Downdraft

50

Gasifier
Manufacturer

Gasifier
Type

Electrical
Generation

Location

End Use

University of South
Carolina,
Columbia, SC

Electricity and
Steam

Nexterra /
Johnson
Controls

Updraft

Grand Forks Truss
Plant,
Grand Forks ND

Electricity and
Heat

EERC Center
for Renewable
Energy

Downdraft

50 kW

Wood waste,
sawdust. 4 to 6 cubic
yards daily

Planned as of July 2007

Dockside Green,
Victoria BC

District
heating and
hot water

Nexterra

Updraft

Thermal only

Urban wood waste

The 8 MMBtu/hr system has been
completed and is undergoing
commissioning in 2009.

Steam for mill

Nexterra

Updraft

Thermal only

Wood residue from
mill and local
construction debris

Scheduled for completion Q4 2009.

District
heating

Nexterra /
Johnson
Controls

Updraft

Thermal only

Municipal
wastewater biosolids

Scheduled to be operational in 2011.
60,000 lb/hr

District
Heating

Nexterra

Updraft

Thermal only

Wood residue

Planned

Syngas for
ethanol
production

Frontline
Bioenergy

Ethanol
feedstock only

Wood chips and corn
cobs
Phase 1: 100 tons/day
Phase 3: 300 tons/day

Currently operating in first of three phases
of implementation. When 3rd phase is
implemented syngas will displace 90% of
plant‘s natural gas.

Kruger Products
Tissue Mill,
New Westminster
BC
Oak Ridge National
Labs in Oak Ridge
Tennessee.
University of
Northern British
Columbia
Prince George, BC
Chippewa Valley
Ethanol Company
Benson, MN

Feedstock

Completed performance and emissions
tests in 2009. The 72 MMBtu/hr system
provides 60,000 lbs/hr of steam and 1.4
MWe of electricity.

1.4 MWe

51

Status

Other Information Resources
The following resources are available for more information on biomass-fired combined
heat and power systems.

International Energy Agency, Task 33
The International Energy Agency (IEA) is an excellent online source for current updates
on the status of thermal gasification technology and projects worldwide, including North
America. The main webpage for their ―Task 33: Thermal Gasification‖ program can be
found at
http://www.gastechnology.org/webroot/app/xn/xd.aspx?it=enweb&xd=iea/homepage.xml
.

National Renewable Energy Laboratory
NREL‘s Biomass Research website is http://www.nrel.gov/biomass/.

U.S. Department of Energy
You can find background on biomass gasification on the Department of Energy‘s website
at http://www.eere.energy.gov/biomass/technologies.html.
The Department of Energy‘s ―Biomass Feedstock Composition and Property Database‖
contains characteristics of a variety of biomass feedstocks at
http://www.eere.energy.gov/biomass/feedstock_databases.html

Oak Ridge National Laboratory
Oak Ridge National Laboratory has a database of biomass characteristics available at
http://cta.ornl.gov/bedb/appendix_b.shtml.

Bioenergy Lists
Bioenergy Lists http://gasifiers.bioenergylists.org/ is a website ―for people involved in
the development of gasification systems.‖ It offers information on current topics,
pictures and reports. Their database of manufacturers & suppliers of gasifiers is available
at: http://gasifiers.bioenergylists.org/gassupply.

Biomass Energy Foundation
The website of the Biomass Energy Foundation http://www.woodgas.com/ was
developed by Dr. Tom Reed, who co-authored ―Survey of Biomass Gasification-2001‖
for the National Renewable Energy Laboratory. Their database of manufacturers,
52

equipment suppliers and research facilities involved in gasification is available at
http://www.woodgas.com/gdatabase.htm.

Energy Research Center of the Netherlands (ECN)
The ECN http://www.ecn.nl has compiled a number of resources on renewable energy.
Among them is ―Phyllis,‖ an extensive database of information on the composition of
biomass and waste at http://www.ecn.nl/phyllis/.

Clean Energy Application Centers
The U.S. Department of Energy‘s Industrial Technologies Program and its eight regional
Clean Energy Application Centers provide assistance to facilities considering CHP,
district energy and waste energy recovery. These centers can offer technology,
application and project development information, case studies and other publications,
workshops and other educational opportunities, and contacts for local resources.
U.S. Clean Heat and Power Association
www.uschpa.org
Gulf Coast Clean Energy Application Center
Texas, Louisiana and Oklahoma
http://www.gulfcoastchp.org
Intermountain Clean Energy Application Center
Arizona, Colorado, New Mexico, Utah, and Wyoming
http://www.intermountainchp.org/
Mid-Atlantic Clean Energy Application Center
Delaware, Maryland, New Jersey, Pennsylvania, Virginia, West Virginia and
Washington D.C.
http://www.chpcenterma.org
Midwest Clean Energy Application Center
Illinois, Indiana, Iowa, Michigan, Minnesota, Missouri, Ohio, Wisconsin
http://www.chpcentermw.org
Northeast Clean Energy Application Center
Connecticut, Maine, Massachusetts, New Hampshire, New York, Rhode Island, and
Vermont
http://www.northeastchp.org
Northwest Clean Energy Application Center
Alaska, Idaho, Montana, Oregon and Washington
http://www.chpcenternw.org
53

Pacific Region Clean Energy Application Center
California, Hawaii and Nevada
http://www.chpcenterpr.org/
Southeast Clean Energy Application Center
Alabama, Arkansas, Florida, Georgia, Kentucky, Mississippi, South Carolina, North
Carolina, Tennessee
http://www.chpcenterse.org

U.S. Environmental Protection Agency
The U.S. Environmental Protection Agency‘s CHP Partnership
(http://www.epa.gov/chp/index.html) works to support the development of new CHP
projects and promote their energy, environmental, and economic benefits.

54

References
Basu, Prabir, ―Combustion and Gasificaton in Fluidized Beds,‖ CRC Press, Boca Raton,
FL, 2006.
Boateng, A.A., G.M.Banowetz, J.J. Steiner, T.F. Barton, D.G. Taylor, K.B. Hicks, H. ElNashaar, and V.K. Sethi, ―Gasification of Kentucky Bluegrass (Poa Pratensis I.) Straw in
a Farm-Scale Reactor‖ Biomass and Bioenergy, 31:153-161, 2007.
http://www.ars.usda.gov/research/publications/Publications.htm?seq_no_115=187440.
Boerrigter, Harold, Sander van Paasen, Patrick Bergman, Jan-Willem Konemann, and
Rob Emmen, ―Tar Removal from Biomass Product Gas: Development and Optimisation
of the OLGA tar removal technology.‖ 14th European Biomass Conference & Exhibition,
Paris, France, October 2005, http://www.ecn.nl/docs/library/report/2005/rx05186.pdf.
Brown, Robert C., Jerod Smeenk, and Clenn Norton, ―Development of analytical
techniques and scrubbing options for contaminants in gasifier streams intended for use in
fuel cells.‖ Submitted to the Chariton Valley Resource Conservation and Development
and the U.S. Department of Energy Biomass Power Program, 2001.
Ciferno, Jared P. and John J. Marano, ―Benchmarking Biomass Gasification
Technologies for Fuels, Chemicals and Hydrogen Production,‖ prepared for U.S.
Department of Energy, National Energy Technology Laboratory,‖ June 2002.
Cummer, Keith R. and Robert C. Brown, ―Ancillary equipment for biomass gasification,‖
Biomass and Bioenergy, Volume 23, pp. 113-128, 2002.
Ducente, AB, ―Large scale gasification of Biomass for Biofuels and Power,‖ prepared for
the European Commission Directorate-General Energy and Transport, Sweden, 2006.
This report discusses the IGCC demonstration project at Varnamo, Sweden.
International Energy Agency, ―Review of Energy Conversion Devices‖
http://media.godashboard.com/gti/IEA/ReviewofEnergyConversionDevicesrev.pdf.
Klass, Donald L., Biomass for Renewable Energy, Fuels, and Chemicals, Academic
Press, San Diego, California, 1998.
Lettner, Friedrich, Helmut Timmerer, Peter Haselbacher, ―Biomass gasification – State of
the art description,‖ Graz University of Technology - Institute of Thermal Engineering
Inffeldgasse 25B, 8010 Graz, Austria, prepared for the European Union, December 2007.
This document provides overviews of gas cleaning and water treatment technologies, in
addition to gasifier technologies.
http://www.gasificationguide.eu/gsg_uploads/documenten/Gasification_Guide_D08_State_of_the_Art_Descripti
on_V09e.pdf
55

Mater Engineering, LTD and T.R. Miles Consulting, Inc., ―Energy Conversion Systems
Analysis for a Biomass Utilization Project in Central Oregon using CROP Modeling,‖
prepared for the Bonneville Environmental Foundation, October 2005. This reference
provides a discussion of market potential and demand for other value-added wood
products, including biochar and bio-oil.
Matsumura, Yukihiko, Tomoaki Minowa, Biljana Potic, Sascha R.A. Kersten, Wolter
Prins, Willibrordus P.M. van Swaaij, Bert van de Beld, Douglas C. Elliott, Gary G.
Neuenschwander, Andrea Kruse and Michael Jerry Antal Jr., ―Biomass gasification in
near- and super-critical water: Status and prospects,‖ Biomass and Bioenergy, Volume
29, pp. 269–292, 2005.
McCormick, A. Tofa, ―A Comparison of Online Backpass Cleaning Technologies:
Detonation, Acoustic and Conventional Steam or Air Sootblowing,‖ Energy Central, July
13, 2007
http://www.energypulse.net/centers/article/article_display.cfm?a_id=1513
Miles, Thomas R., Thomas R. Miles Jr., Larry L. Baxter, Richard W. Bryers, Bryan M.
Jenkins, and Lawrence L. Owens, ―Alkali Deposits Found in Biomass Power Plants,‖
Summary Report prepared for the National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO,
April 15, 1995 http://www.trmiles.com/alkali/Alkali_Report.pdf. This reference includes
strategies for minimizing alkali deposits.
Milne, T.A., R.J. Evans and N. Abatzoglou, ―Biomass Gasifier ‗Tars‘: Their Nature,
Formation, and Conversion,‖ National Renewable Energy Laboratory, Golden, CO
November 1998, http://media.godashboard.com/gti/IEA/TomandNicolasreport.pdf.
Olofsson, Ingemar, Anders Nordin, and Ulf Soderlind, ―Initial Review and Evaluation of
Process Technologies and Systems Suitable for Cost-Efficient Medium-Scale
Gasification for Biomass to Liquid Fuels,‖ University of Ulmea, Sweden, 2005,
http://www.biofuelregion.se/dokument/5_95.pdf. This reference provides a survey of all
types of gasifiers: fixed bed, fluidized bed, entrained flow, indirect, plasma arc, and
several other concepts. It also covers gas cleaning and processing techniques and
processes for synthetic fuels and chemicals.
Pels, Jan R., Danielle S. de Nie, and Jacob H.A. Kiel, ―Utilization of ashes from biomass
combustion and gasification,‖ published at the 14th European Biomass Conference &
Exhibition, Paris, France, October 2005
http://www.ecn.nl/docs/library/report/2005/rx05182.pdf.
Ptasinski, Krzysztof J., Mark J. Prins, and Anke Pierik, ―Exergetic evaluation of biomass
gasification,‖ Energy, Volume 32, Issue 4, April 2007, Pages 568-574.
Ragland, Kenneth W., and Andrew J. Baker, ―Mineral Matter in Coal and WoodReplications for Solid Fueled Gas Turbines,‖ University of Wisconsin, Madison, WI and
56

U.S. Forest Products Laboratory, Madison, WI,
http://www.fpl.fs.fed.us/documnts/pdf1987/ragla87a.pdf
Reed, T. and A. Das, ―Biomass Downdraft Gasifier Engine Systems Handbook,‖ Solar
Energy Research Institute, 1988, available from http://www.woodgas.com/bookstore.htm
This reference provides information on small-scale and low-tech gasifiers.
Reed, T. and S. Gaur, ―A Survey of Biomass Gasification: 2001,‖ prepared for the
National Renewable Energy Laboratory, 2001.
Rezaiyan, John, Gasification Technologies: A Primer for Engineers and Scientists, CRC
Press, Boca Raton, FL, 2005.
RGW Enterprises, ―Clean Energy and Environment Project Feasibility Study,‖ Prepared
for the Port of Benton, Richland, Washington, July 2007.
http://www.portofbenton.com/sidepage/newsevents.html
Roos, Carolyn J., Biomass Drying and Dewatering for Clean Heat & Power, Northwest
Clean Heat and Power Regional Application Center, 2008,
http://chpcenternw.org/NwChpDocs/BiomassDryingAndDewateringForCleanHeatAndPo
wer.pdf.
Savoie, P. and S. Descôteaux, ―Artificial drying of corn stover in mid-size bales,‖
Canadian Biosystems Engineering, Volume 46 2004,
http://engrwww.usask.ca/oldsite/societies/csae/protectedpapers/c0418.pdf.
Wright, Lynn, Bob Boundy, Bob Perlack, Stacy Davis and Bo Saulsbury, Biomass
Energy Data Book: Edition 1, Prepared for the U.S. Department of Energy, Energy
Efficiency and Renewable Energy Office, Prepared by the Oak Ridge National
Laboratory, Oak Ridge, Tennessee, September 2006,
http://cta.ornl.gov/bedb/pdf/Biomass_Energy_Data_Book.pdf
Vamvuka, D., D. Zografos, and G. Alevizos, ―Control methods for mitigating biomass
ash-related problems in fluidized beds,‖ Bioresource Technology, September 2007.
Van Loo, Sjaak, and Jaap Koppejan, ―The Handbook of Biomass Combustion and CoFiring,‖ Earthscan Publishing, London, 2008.
Williams, Rob, Nathan Parker, Christopher Yang, Joan Ogden and Bryan Jenkins (UC
Davis, Institute of Transportation Studies), H2 production Via Biomass Gasification,
prepared for Public Interest Energy Research (PIER) Program, California Energy
Commission, July 2007.
Yoshida, Yoshikuni, Kiyoshi Dowaki, Yukihiko Matsumura, Ryuji Matsuhashi, Dayin
Li, Hisashi Ishitani, and Hiroshi Komiyama, ―Comprehensive comparison of efficiency
and CO2 emissions between biomass energy conversion technologies – position of
57

supercritical water gasification in biomass technologies,‖ Biomass & Energy, Volume 25,
pages 257-272, 2003.

58

