Sustainable Business Practices
of Commercial Retrofit
Companies in Pierce County
Research Report

By:

Alan Hardcastle &

Sally Zeiger Hanson

March 2, 2011
WSUEEP11-021

905 Plum Street SE, Bldg. 3
Olympia, WA 98504-3165
www.energy.wsu.edu
(360) 956-2000

Sponsorship
Financial support for this project was provided by WorkForce Central in Pierce County, through
funding from the Workforce Investment Act, U.S. Department of Labor.

About the WSU Extension Energy Program
The Washington State University Extension Energy Program (WSU Energy Program) is a
recognized leader in energy research, development and technology transfer. The WSU Energy
Program works with government agencies, power marketers, utility consortiums, educational
institutions, private businesses and industries on projects that promote energy conservation,
research, development of renewable energy sources, and economic and workforce
development.

Acknowledgements
The authors would like to thank the project sponsors for their leadership and guidance in the
design and completion of this project. Special thanks to Linda Nguyen (WorkForce Central),
Arabie Jaloway-Hill (Full World Consulting), Andrew Williams (McKinstry) and the Pierce County
SEES (Sustainable Economy and Environment) Leadership committee for their support of this
project.
Copyright
© 2011 Washington State University, Extension Energy Program. This publication contains
material written and produced for public distribution. You may reprint this written material,
provided you do not use it to endorse a commercial product. Please reference by author(s) and
title and credit Washington State University Extension Energy Program.
Disclaimer
This project was funded the Workforce Investment Act as implemented by the U.S. Department
of Labor’s Employment and Training Administration. The project was created by the grantee
and does not necessarily reflect the official position of the U.S. Department of Labor. The
Department of Labor makes no guarantees, warranties, or assurances of any kind, express or
implied, with respect to such information, including any information on linked sites and
including, but not limited to, accuracy of the information or its completeness, timeliness,
usefulness, adequacy, continued availability, or ownership. This solution is copyrighted by the
institution that created it. Internal use by an organization and/or personal use by an individual
for non-commercial purposes is permissible. All other uses require the prior authorization of
the copyright owner.

1

Sustainable Business Practices of
Commercial Retrofit Firms in Pierce County

Abstract
The primary focus of this study is to understand the sustainability initiatives implemented by
companies involved in commercial retrofit projects in Pierce County. The study contains an
extensive review of existing literature and data sources related to sustainability within this
sector. Interviews were conducted to collect data about industry trends and advancing
sustainability within the sector.
The study begins by presenting the context for sustainability-related definitions. The business
case for sustainability and how it impacts the commercial retrofit sector is discussed next,
followed by a description of the sustainability initiatives implemented within commercial
retrofit organizations and their projects. The interview findings form the core of the report’s
conclusions, which were derived from employer input on the following subjects: organizational
commitment to sustainability, current sustainability activities, incentives and barriers for
sustainability, and the benefits of operating sustainably.
Finally, based on the conclusions that more Return On Investment (ROI) data is needed and that
training is essential but problematic in this sector, the following potential action steps are put
forward for consideration:
Education and Training:
Convene education partners, training providers and industry representatives in Pierce
County to focus on the following: identify specific training needs and gaps; catalog
existing training programs; discuss training delivery options; and identify next steps.
Provide guidance and coordination to education and training providers as they develop
training to meet the needs identified by the industry partners.
ROI Methods, Data and Tools:
Conduct a national review of effective strategies and tools for determining ROI that are
currently being used or that are under development.
Identify the metrics that are being used to determine ROI on sustainably built projects in
the public sector. Since publicly funded buildings have required a LEED Silver standard
for several years, it is likely that they have more data collected and that data will be
made available to researchers since the data is not proprietary.
Use the identified metrics to develop a tool that can be used to determine the ROI on
building retrofits and related projects. This uniform measurement tool could be a
specific deliverable from the SEES Leadership committee to the community.
2

Introduction
This research project investigates the use of sustainable business practices by design and
construction firms who offer commercial retrofit services in Pierce County. The study was
commissioned by the Pierce County Sustainable Economy and Environment Study (SEES)
Leadership group, and funded by Workforce Central, which is the Washington State Workforce
Development Council for Pierce County.
The goal of the research was to understand how businesses that support green and sustainable
building construction are adopting sustainable practices within their own organizations, and to
identify the incentives and barriers to the application of sustainable practices among these
companies. This report provides a focused snapshot of one specialized sector of the
construction industry that serves as a pilot case for use by SEES leadership and other
stakeholders to promote sustainable business practices in Pierce County.
The Context for Sustainability
What is Sustainability? Conceptually, the term “sustainable” seems straightforward. In
practice, however, the term is enormously complex, and there are many different definitions in
use today. The United Nations published Our Common Future (aka The Brundtland Report) in
1987 which became the cornerstone document of the sustainability movement, and that
definition of sustainable development is:
Development that meets the needs of the present without compromising the ability of
future generations to meet their own needs.1
An extension of this definition later appeared in the 2000 Earth Charter report, which describes
three pillars of sustainability. 2 Collectively, the pillars are often described as the core targets
of sustainability needed to achieve a “Triple Bottom Line.”
The three pillars of sustainability include the environment, social equity, and the
economy. A strong resilient economy depends upon a vibrant and equitable society
which in turn relies on a vigorous flourishing environment. The balance of the three
pillars leads to prosperity and peace for future generations.
While there are overt and sometimes subtle differences between these definitions, there is a
common theme: the shift toward more efficient, fair and conscientious use of resources.

1

See: Bruntland, G. (ed.), (1987), Our common future: The world commission on environment and development, Oxford, Oxford
University Press.
2
For more information about the Earth Charter, see: http://www.earthcharterinaction.org/content/

3

Business Sustainability
There is a compelling business case for sustainability: Recent research is finding a strong
correlation between businesses that exercise sustainability leadership and positive financial
indicators, such as return-on-investment and earnings per share. Corporate commitment to
sustainability is having a positive impact on business success.3
Most businesses have taken at least some action to improve sustainability. These actions may
be as simple as implementing a recycling program, promoting employee ride-sharing programs,
or conserving energy and reducing environmental impacts via new production processes. Some
companies have developed “Corporate Sustainability Plans” (an evolution of the ethics-focused
term Corporate Social Responsibility) in an attempt to augment long-term shareholder value, as
companies embrace new markets and product opportunities, implement organizational
improvements, and work to manage the social, environmental and economic risks associated
with pursuit of the triple bottom line.
An Evolutionary Process
A recent global analysis on sustainable manufacturing and eco-innovation by the Organization
for Economic Cooperation and Development (OECD) concluded that while many companies are
engaged in sustainability activities, most corporate sustainability efforts fall far short of
addressing concerns such as global shortages of natural resources, climate change or energy
security.4 Other industry observers assert that only companies that make sustainability a
priority will achieve a competitive advantage, and that means re-thinking business models as
well as changes to products, technologies and processes.5
The OECD report describes how three main facets of eco-innovation (targets, mechanisms, and
impacts) together form the basis for a model that describes the levels and ways in which
organizations can pursue goals that result in increasingly beneficial outcomes for the
environment (see Figure 1).
The model is instructive because the same factors can logically be applied to organizations that
are intent on pursuing any combination of environmental, social and economic goals. It also
recognizes that technological changes are associated with the majority of sustainability
initiatives which, in the case of commercial building retrofits, is usually tied to specific products
or improvements to work processes. Changes in other business functions and structures such
as marketing, infrastructure, or the design of organizations themselves, tend not to be as
heavily tied to technology changes. Functional and structural changes are typically more
complicated and difficult to implement however, and are therefore not as common. This model
3

See: Nidumolu, R., Prahalad, C, & Rangaswami, M. (2009). Why sustainability is now the key driver of innovation. Harvard
Business Review (September). See also: Oekom Research, Sustainability and Business Success, 6/2005 http://www.oekomresearch.com/index_en.php?content=studien. See also: Measuring business success from sustainability certification. United
Nations-Global Impact and Rainforest Alliance, 2007:
http://www.unglobalcompact.org/docs/news_events/8.1/UN_Rainforest_alliance.pdf
4
OECD Policy Brief, June 2009, “Sustainable Manufacturing and Eco-innovation: Towards a Green Economy”
http://www.oecd.org/dataoecd/34/27/42944011.pdf
5
See: Nidumolu, R., Prahalad, C, & Rangaswami, M. (September, 2009). Why Sustainability is Now the Key Driver of Innovation.
Harvard Business Review.

4

underscores the idea that getting started with even very small steps is an important way to
begin building momentum. Moving an organization towards sustainability is a process, an
evolution that takes time.

Figure 1 OECD “Eco-innovation Mechanisms”

Sustainability in the Commercial Retrofit Industry
An analysis of the commercial retrofit sector in Pierce County provides a window for
understanding how organizations that provide services to enhance the sustainability of
commercial buildings are also beginning to adopt sustainable principles and internal practices
themselves.
There are many examples to draw from, as Washington State is a recognized leader in
sustainable building and construction. On a per capita basis, the state has more green buildings
of any state except Oregon that meet the U.S. Green Building Council’s Leadership in Energy
and Environmental Design (LEED) standard.6 The state also has deep historical roots in
environmental protection and energy efficiency that provide a regulatory and policy foundation
for sustainable business practices.7 The fact that state law requires that all major public
6

See Washington State Department of Ecology: http://www.ecy.wa.gov/pubs/0701039.pdf. Also:
http://www.forbes.com/2007/10/16/environment-energy-vermont-biz-beltwaycx_bw_mm_1017greenstates_slide_4.html?thisSpeed=15000
7
See: Hardcastle, A. (2010). Green jobs in Washington State: Progress, opportunities and challenges. Olympia, WA:
Washington State University Extension Energy Program.

5

buildings must be built to meet LEED-Silver standards has also helped propel sustainable design
and construction in Washington.8 Most design and construction firms support new building
and retrofit projects, and although some firms specialize in sustainability, most implement both
traditional and sustainable projects.
Commercial retrofit projects represent a special class of activity for designers and builders, as
the primary goals are usually to replace or upgrade various existing building structures,
components and systems to optimize energy use and building performance. Although the costs
associated with retrofitting these buildings can vary by local market, the availability of
experienced vendors and project scale, a growing body of research suggests that the
investment outcomes and other benefits of sustainably-focused commercial retrofits generate
positive economic outcomes for clients.9
The initial investment associated with retrofits can be high, and these costs are a major concern
of building owners and operators. But some studies suggest that in addition to energy
efficiency, other tangible factors such as reduced operating costs, occupancy and rental rates,
lease structures and sales prices, are all positively affected by sustainable building
characteristics.10 Increased employee productivity is another benefit of sustainability retrofits,
and some studies concluded that these benefits are actually higher than benefits due to energy
savings.11 Presumably, human productivity gains are due to improved air quality, more natural
light, and optimal space configurations that may help to reduce absenteeism or other negative
health effects that could reduce worker productivity. Some of these studies were not
longitudinal or systematic, and they do not account for temporary productivity gains that could
be associated with changes in the workplace often referred to as the ‘Hawthorne effect.’(The
Hawthorne effect — an increase in worker productivity produced by the psychological stimulus
of being singled out and made to feel important.)
Illustrating Client Benefits—Courthouse Renovation: One example that illustrates the savings
that can be realized from a sustainable retrofit project is the renovation of the Thurston county
courthouse by McKinstry, a Seattle-based engineering firm. As part of the early planning
process, McKinstry was able to provide a specific projection of the savings that would be
8

See Chapter 39.35D of the Revised Code of Washington: http://apps.leg.wa.gov/rcw/default.aspx?cite=39.35D&full=true All
major facility projects of public agencies receiving any funding in a state capital budget, or projects financed through a financing
contract as defined in RCW 39.94.020, must be designed, constructed, and certified to at least the LEED silver standard.
9
Miller, N., Spivey, J., & Florance, A. (2008). Does green pay off? Journal of Real Estate Portfolfio Management, 14. See also:
Eichholtz, P., N. Kok, and J. Quigley (2010). Doing well by doing good? Green office buildings. European Centre for Corporate
Engagement, Maastricht University, Netherlands. Also: Fuerst, F. and P. McAllister (2009). An Investigation of the Effect of EcoLabeling on Office Occupancy Rates. Journal of Sustainable Real Estate, 1, 49–64.
10
Miller, N., Spivey, J., & Florance, A. (2008). Does green pay off?
11
Kats, G. (2003). The costs and benefits of green. Report to California’s Sustainable Building Task Force, Capital E Analytics
(October). Also: Miller, N., Pogue, D., Gough, Q., & Davis, S. (2009). Green Buildings and Productivity. Journal of Sustainable
Real Estate, Vol. 1 (No. 1), 65-89.

6

realized over time on the project, using calculations based on data from similar projects. The
savings came in three main areas: projected energy savings, operations savings, and from
rebates and incentives offered by the local utilities company. These three areas of savings
resulted in a 20% reduction in total project costs. Additionally, by comparing various costbenefit scenarios and improvement measures, McKinstry was able to forecast that reducing the
building’s energy needs will continue to benefit the bottom line, the people working in the
building, and the surrounding environment long after the initial project is paid for.
In summary, much of the newest research suggests that the overall economic, employee health
and environmental benefits associated with sustainably designed commercial retrofits likely
outweigh the associated upfront investment costs. While clients interested in funding
commercial retrofits continue to pay close attention to project costs, there is a growing interest
in projects that can simultaneously reduce costs and improve the long-term bottom line
through sustainable designs that maximize energy efficiency and enhance the physical work
environment for employees. By design, sustainable retrofit projects also help reduce negative
environmental effects by reducing waste due to less-efficient building materials and practices,
and by enhancing operational efficiency. Thus, sustainable retrofit projects have become
increasingly popular among clients because the benefits associated with sustainable designs
‘pencil out’. They are proving to be cost-effective as well as responsive to a growing awareness
among companies about the environmental impacts and risks associated with regulatory issues
and public perception.

Adopting Sustainable Practices in Pierce County
Washington State’s longstanding emphasis on balancing environmental protection with the
economic development needs of the state has shaped how commercial retrofit employers view
new business opportunities in the state. In some respects, these historical roots imply that
Washington’s commercial retrofit contractors may be well-positioned to take advantage of the
growing emphasis by building owners and the public on the value of sustainable retrofit
projects; many companies have already moved in this direction, albeit in varying degrees, due
to the state’s regulatory structure, and the availability of improved materials and construction
technologies. Thus, for many companies the shift toward sustainable building is a natural
extension of work they are already doing.
Although it seems inevitable that the current political environment and growing consumer
demand will create new opportunities for firms to capture the sustainable building market, it is
less clear how much the design firms and contractors who provide sustainable commercial
retrofit services are adopting sustainable business practices as a core value of their own
7

business. What internal changes are being implemented by these companies, and how
extensive are these efforts? How do these companies describe the payoff associated with
operating more sustainably?
As noted earlier, while many businesses sponsor internal programs aimed at enhancing
sustainability, such as recycling, broader policy or structural changes can be difficult to
implement as they can face stiff internal resistance and require additional resources. This
research, which focuses on commercial retrofit firms in Pierce County, begins to answer these
questions and suggests areas for further inquiry.
Research Methods
An extensive background review of written reports, industry research, and other technical
documents was conducted to identify sustainability trends, indicators and initiatives in industry,
and specifically in the commercial construction sector. Existing state labor market data and
other economic and industry data were also reviewed to provide context for the study design
and report. Those findings are integrated into the body of the report, primarily in the
introduction and conclusion sections.
In-person and telephone interviews were conducted with employers who were recommended
either by the SEES Steering Committee or by others in the commercial real estate field (see
Appendix A). Participants were generally acknowledged by their peers to be implementing
sustainable business practices. Each participant was provided a list of questions in advance,
and participated in an interview with the authors that typically ranged from 45-90 minutes
Companies to be interviewed comprised a select group; they were selected using the following
criteria:
They are firms located in Pierce County and/or are involved in commercial retrofit
projects in Pierce County.
They are implementing sustainable business practices internally.
Interviews were facilitated by the authors, and included a general introduction to the project
and an overview of sustainability definitions and practices to provide context for the
participants. Specific questions and discussion topics introduced during the interviews included
the following:
Describing sustainability initiatives within each company.
Level of organizational commitment to sustainable business principles and practices.
The most significant barriers, incentives, or opportunities that impact an organization’s
emphasis on sustainability.
How companies are responding internally to new requirements or expectations related
to sustainability.
What benefits the organization attributes to operating sustainably.
8

Data collection also included input from participants about additional topics and issues related
to sustainability, and this input provided additional context and new insights about the study
model, including new clues about how industry sustainability initiatives are regarded and
implemented.
Following the interviews, additional information was collected from participants, conference
presenters and from other industry representatives identified by participants and sponsors as
knowledgeable about sustainability initiatives. The draft report was circulated for review by all
participants and sponsors. Modifications were made to correct for factual errors or omissions,
and new information suggested or provided by reviewers was added to the report, where
appropriate.
Results/Findings
The findings reflect the major themes identified during the analysis of the initial interview data
and through follow-up conversations with interviewees. The findings are generally organized to
follow the interview protocol described above.
Many Reasons for Implementing Sustainability Initiatives
Companies reported focusing on sustainable business practices for several reasons: First,
participants reported that they anticipate the market is increasingly moving in this direction.
Most employers reported an increased demand from their clients who want the savings
associated with sustainable retrofit projects, and to be more environmentally responsible.
Second, all employers reported that sustainable retrofit projects are helping clients reduce
maintenance and operations costs, and these benefits are spurring clients’ interest in retrofit
projects. Third, most employers were quick to point out that government building projects
require it: All publicly funded buildings in Washington State must be built to the LEED Silver
standard (there are some exceptions for schools).
Finally, several participants noted that offering sustainable components in a bid process can
help move that bid to the top position, since many clients are beginning to see both the
financial value and positive environmental effects of sustainable projects, which is increasingly
viewed as a competitive advantage. Marketing a firm as green or sustainable can be an
effective strategy for attracting new clients, but incorporating sustainability as strategy for new
business development means that firms must also deliver on the promise. As one participant
put it:
“We sell our commitment to sustainability to our clients, and we think that will make us
more competitive. If a client likes our green approach, it results in ours being the
winning bid and being recommended to other clients. One additional project a year
would make it all worthwhile.”

9

Companies that embrace sustainability as a broader strategy for growth, and who deliver
results for clients, may have an edge over companies that do not. As one participant predicted,
“Early adopters will have a significant competitive advantage.”
Market Drivers and Incentives: The growing interest by clients in sustainable retrofit projects
was commonly cited by employers as a key driver for adopting sustainable practices internally.
In some cases retrofit companies seized the growing demand for sustainable retrofits as an
opportunity to capture additional market share, while also establishing a new vision for their
organization that embraces the longer-term objectives of economic and environmental
sustainability. One participating organization, for instance, created a 2020 vision in the year
2000. At that time, they determined that environmental concerns were “mission-critical”. As
one participant stated, “Business has to accept responsibility for the environment. We need to
use methods that help avoid harm to the environment; we need a long-term perspective.” All
participants cited rebate programs such as those offered by local utilities and nationally by
Energy Star as effective ways to help clients realize savings on their retrofit projects. Employers
reported that these rebates are serving as powerful incentives for clients to request more
sustainable products and services for their project than they have in the past.
Employers also noted that client attitudes about the goals of retrofit projects are shifting, which
influences how retrofit companies see their role in providing value-added options to their
clients that go beyond cost savings. Many participants said that it used to be that clients were
only concerned about up-front costs. Now they are requesting that both sustainability goals
and cost savings should be the targets of retrofit projects. According to participants, clients
recognizing and considering long term savings is a growing trend that has helped spur more
sustainable projects, which has helped cushion the collapse in demand for new construction.
These employers also reported, however, that most client decisions about sustainable retrofit
options continue to be fiscally-driven. For example, clients are asking for projects that will save
energy because they recognize that energy costs are bound to go up over the next few years.
Thus, decisions about retrofit projects are driven first by what clients believe will help sustain
their business interests. At the same time, however, clients want to be made aware of retrofit
options that will result in a variety of sustainable outcomes, and the potential for long-term
benefits.
The national economic recession was underscored by deep reductions in new construction, and
employers said that the retrofit market was not immune to business declines. As one
participant reported, “The current economy is tough, revenues are down over the last few
years and project delivery methods have shifted.” Interview participants did report that the
last quarter of 2010 seemed to show a slight improvement in the industry. Another bright note
is that companies involved in commercial construction say that since the economic recession
10

they have experienced a general shift by many clients in favor of retrofits rather than the moreexpensive option of new construction, especially in the last two years. This shift has led to
some increased demand for contracts and for workers experienced in retrofit projects, but
there is also more competition for what retrofit work is available; companies reported that
there is increased competition for all projects. For example, one participant noted that prior to
2008, 85-90% of their projects were “negotiated” (vs. competitive) and came mostly from
repeat customers. Now, there is increased pressure to reduce fees so clients are getting bids
from multiple companies. Only 50% of their current projects are now negotiated; staff
members now spend more time working on the bidding process than ever before. This is
expensive because it draws staff time away from construction projects and into the bidding
process.
Several employers remarked that the private retrofit market has been slower to adapt to this
new way of thinking about and calculating project costs than government, due chiefly to
regulation. Participants said that by requiring that state-funded buildings be LEED Silver
certified, the government is really in the forefront on investing in sustainable buildings. One
participant noted that state and local governments represent a significant client base for many
commercial retrofit companies, making them influential in driving sustainable practices among
the companies themselves. This employer said that the LEED Silver standard required of public
projects has become the de facto standard for most private-sector projects as well, in part
because most retrofit companies serve both markets, and because the costs associated with
achieving the Silver standard have declined. However, as noted earlier, while clients are
requesting sustainable products and services in their retrofit projects, cost continues to be their
primary consideration. In the cases where a project can be both cost effective and generate
outcomes that promote sustainability, clients are very satisfied.
Sustainability Takes Leadership
Whether or not an organization had a sustainability value statement as part of their formal
policies—and only a few actually did—each organization interviewed had a “sustainability
champion” on staff who is moving sustainability initiatives forward. Without exception, these
champions had personal passion for sustainability and see their work as having a broad impact
on the world. In some cases the champion was a highly-placed manager or executive who
could direct policies and financial resources to support sustainable business operations and
internal expectations. In other cases, the champion might be an influential middle-manager,
engineer or other insider who commanded the respect of company leadership and their peers.
In all cases, these champions put their energy and focus on driving sustainable action
throughout the company. As one of these champions said, “They call me the ‘Grandfather of
Tacoma Sustainability’ and ‘Tacoma’s Extremist Architect’. I don’t mind those names. I believe
in this stuff. I have the passion and the energy for it.”
11

Commercial Retrofit Work is Changing
Participants report that the increased focus on sustainability is changing the structure of retrofit
work. In 2008, the American Institute of Architects endorsed a template for a new kind of
construction contract called Integrated Project Development (IPD)12. IPDs are three way
contracts between the building owner, the architect and the contractor. This differs from the
more traditional Design-Build approach because all parties take equal risk and share rewards on
the project. These shared goals are resulting in reduced project times to completion and
decreased project costs. One employer noted that savings realized by using an IPD allow
contractors to build in more sustainable features than might otherwise be affordable.
Increasing the amount of sustainable content in commercial projects has also reinforced the
use of sustainable business practices among retrofit companies themselves.
What’s Old is New: Innovative new materials, advanced technologies and efficient work
processes have enabled retrofit companies to offer solutions that can significantly enhance
financial and environmental outcomes for their clients, and some of these technologies also
help retrofit companies operate more sustainably. But many of today’s sustainability strategies
and practices mimic nature’s systems and are based on old, traditional methods. As one
participant noted, “What is old, is new again.” Other building industry representatives have
noted that vegetative roofs, daylight harvesting, and using the earth and plants to treat water
are all new takes on time tested practices that have been used around the world.13 Vegetative,
or green, roofs mimic nature’s water cycle. One participant reported that in some seasons,
green roofs can capture up to 75% of the rain water that falls. Excess water is then used in one
of several ways: to irrigate the plants on the roof; in the building’s operations to flush the
toilets; or it becomes part of the water cycle by evaporating back into the atmosphere. In a
building retrofit project, for instance, water that formerly would have run off of a roof or
parking surface and entered into the water treatment system is now being cycled back into the
system without any need for treatment. Green roofs have been used in England and European
countries for hundreds of years because of these very benefits.
Regional land developers are now starting to use bio retention areas to capture rain and run-off
water. When they are designed and implemented correctly, bio retention areas can eliminate
the need for pipe systems and water treatment. This system uses the earth’s natural ability to
filter and clean water. Increasing the number and effectiveness of these systems is key to the
success of improving the water quality of Puget Sound and is a core goal of many
environmental initiatives. Bio retention areas work to manage both the quality and quantity of
water which several participants noted is of particular interest to building professionals in
12

Integrated Project Development guidelines: http://www.aia.org/contractdocs/AIAS077630
Wright, Yancy, Director, Sellen Sustainability, Keynote address at Technology Transfer Workshop at Renton Technical College,
January 31, 2011.
13

12

Pierce County. Two housing developments in Pierce County are being built with this type of
decentralized water treatment system in place: Cascadia in Sumner and Falling Water in
Puyallup.
Benefits of Sustainability Initiatives Still in Early Stage
While the companies interviewed for this study had a variety of sustainability initiatives in the
works, and all were engaged in related retrofit projects, most were in the early or
developmental phases of implementation in their own companies. For instance, all participants
had an internal recycling effort, and each firm was implementing an internal initiative aimed at
reducing resource and energy use within their own operations. Most participants reported that
they are encouraging the movement of sustainable practices down their supply chains, and one
employer said that they encourage and rely on subcontractors to know specifics about energy
saving appliances and rebates, in part because they are in a better position to track the rules
and changes that affect their products and systems than are most general contractors.
Although there is evidence that these companies are forging new sustainability strategies,
internalizing sustainable business practices and engaging their industry partners, efforts to
connect sustainable practices with improved return-on-investment (ROI) for clients or internal
operations appears to be limited. While firms routinely cited outcomes such as cost savings
tied to specific enhancements, systematically collecting and comparing data to determine ROI
can be time consuming and complicated. Indeed, several participants indicated that the data
collection required in order to develop specific return-on-investment (ROI) information for
projects they were leading will take at least one to two more years to gather.
The development of sustainable business practices among these firms has accelerated in recent
years, due in part to client expectations and the availability of existing certification systems,
such as LEED. Many participants reported that LEED has provided an important framework for
retrofit companies and a reference point for the use of sustainable practices internally. Indeed,
the LEED certification system was the most commonly cited strategy for increasing an
organization’s sustainability, and most organizations said they encourage staff to become LEED
accredited; some of these organizations cover the cost of the certification process for
employees. One participating contractor is seeking the Green Contractor Certification that is
offered by the Association of Building Contractors14. This certification requires the organization
to have met the sustainability criteria outlined for both job sites and the home office, which
may also help promote internalizing sustainable business practices.
Another common technique reported by participants was Life Cycle Analysis (LCA), which is a
process that contractors are using in their proposals with clients to enable them to consider the
14

Green Contractor Certification details: http://www.greenconstructionatwork.com

13

long term pay off of investing upfront in sustainable products and systems in their retrofit
project.15 One participant reported that they generated 3-4 different options for a client, using
LCA to demonstrate how higher-cost retrofits actually generated a better benefit in the long
run, in part by using a brick exterior and metal roof—and the client chose the premium option
when they saw that ‘least-cost’ resulted over the life cycle of the project. He added that some
clients still want the cheapest retrofits, even in light of LCA showing long-term benefits, but at
least they are able to show the estimated ROI for each option.
Sustainability Costs are Coming Down
Several participants noted that costs for building sustainably are often not as high as they are
perceived to be by clients. Just as new processes and technologies enable retrofit companies to
do more, they can also help bring the costs down. Participating contractors reported that LEED
Silver has become almost the new baseline for construction and that LEED Silver does not
require any additional expenditure to achieve. Two participants made the following estimates:
it takes an estimated 3% above conventional construction costs to build to LEED Gold, and
Platinum is estimated to require an 8% premium. In the case of the Pacific Plaza Project in
Tacoma, which was Pierce County’s first LEED Platinum retrofit project, the additional expenses
resulted in the building being leased at a higher rate per square foot than other buildings in the
market. However, the efficiencies built into the building resulted in enough savings that from
the tenants’ point of view, the lease in this LEED Platinum building would be at least the same,
if not less, than the total cost of other options in the market but in a much higher quality space.
One participant reported that the owner of Pacific Plaza is fond of touting the positive effects of
sustainably-built structures on employee productivity; the owner says that Pacific Plaza leases
are essentially “free” if the building delivers up to a 5% increase in employee productivity as a
recent national study indicates. The Pacific Plaza owner says, “A great building pays for itself in
employee savings.” According to another participant, healthier buildings save a tenant $300 per
square foot, per employee, from increased employee productivity.16
Cost of Training Can Be a Barrier to Sustainability
All interview participants noted that training for staff can be a significant barrier to becoming
more sustainable as an organization. Although employers said they thought that it was
important that staff develop the knowledge and skills needed to implement sustainable
practices, training employees in sustainable principles and techniques is time intensive and
expensive. One reason cited by participants is that most of the available training requires so
much time off of the worksite. Most participants noted that they are already operating with
15

For a summary of LCA in the building industry see: Nebel, B. (2006) Life cycle assessment and the building and construction industry,
Auckland, New Zealand: Beacon Pathway Ltd. See also: National Institute of Standards and Technologies, Building for Environmental and
Economic Sustainability (BEES), at: http://www.nist.gov/el/economics/BEESSoftware.cfm
16

Anderson, Dale, By the Numbers: Creating Real Sustainability Savings, Business Examiner, January 31, 2011.

14

very lean staffing and that allowing employees to attend training at the level needed for them
to enable the effective use of sustainable techniques in their jobs is expensive to implement.
Participants also reported that many professional employees are already fully-engaged in
developing or executing projects, and there is no time for additional training to learn new
methods and techniques. One employer described how the stress associated with meeting
existing project schedules can compel employees to rely on the strategies they learned at the
beginning of their career, rather than trying to learn new skills. Thus, while the lack of training
results in employees not having the skills they need to do their work in a more sustainable way,
the costs associated with training—primarily time away from work to participate—and meeting
existing workload requirements can be a deterrent to learning and applying sustainable
business practices in the workplace.
Regulation as a Sustainability Driver
Throughout the interviews, regulation did not emerge as a definitive barrier to sustainability. In
fact, when it did surface, regulation was more often viewed as a catalyst for sustainable
business practices. One employer described how Pierce County has a permitting check list that
prioritizes projects that are implemented using sustainable practices such as bio retention
areas. State funded building projects require that their buildings be built to the LEED Silver
standards. Participants noted that this requirement has resulted in LEED Silver criteria
becoming a de facto baseline for most private sector construction projects as well. Rather than
suggesting that existing regulations should be somehow reduced or even rescinded to give the
industry more flexibility, interviewees more often said that more regulation may be what is
needed to move sustainability forward. To some extent the general support for existing
regulations among these employers may be expected, as study participants were known to
have invested in sustainable business practices and therefore comprise a select group.
Nevertheless, most participants viewed the regulatory structure and standards that support
sustainable practices as evidence of a desirable evolution of the industry. One participant said
that sustainability requirements are similar to the safety requirements put in place in the past,
which were resisted but over time proved to be beneficial to employees and companies alike.
As he put it:
“20 years ago when more rigorous safety standards were imposed, a lot of

companies screamed it would break them, but now they’re more safe and
efficient, and in the long run you have a safer, healthier workforce, and it’s seen
as a cost savings. The sustainability movement needs the same driver, it needs
requirements…it will cost some up front.”

15

Example of a Regional Best Practice
Pierce County has developed some very innovative partnerships, employers and retrofit
projects. One in particular , the Pacific Plaza parking garage in downtown Tacoma, was noted by
several participants as a project that underscores how teamwork, a focus on sustainable
outcomes—and an unanticipated opportunity—resulted in a notable example of a sustainable
retrofit in the region. Pacific Plaza is the first new Class-A commercial building built in
Downtown Tacoma in the past eight years. It is an award winning, public/private venture that
incorporated vision, leadership, and deliberate planning that resulted in a project with many
sustainable attributes and results.
The project was an adaptive reuse of a 1960’s 5-story parking garage into a high-end mixed-use
office building. During the interview, one participating contractor painted a verbal “Before
Photo” of the building:
“It was a hazard to the city, it was the eyesore of downtown…the structure was failing;
the reinforcing tendons (of the structure) were literally shooting out into the street.”
Completed in July 2009, the retrofit resulted in 68,000 square feet of commercial space, 34,000
square feet of retail ready space along Pacific Avenue, and a net increase of 102 parking stalls.
Design features such as a 29,000 square foot green roof, an 180,000 gallon cistern transformed
from the Turkish bath found in the basement of a long-ago demolished building on the site, a
state-of-the-art mechanical system and extensive use of natural daylight enabled Pacific Plaza
to become Pierce County’s first LEED Platinum building. This successful result of the PublicPrivate Partnership between the City of Tacoma and Pacific Plaza Development creates a new
paradigm for development standards within Tacoma’s urban core.
The building was designed to use 28 percent less energy than average. Other green
achievements include the reuse of 78 percent of the existing structure. For example, rather
than removing the cistern and creating more waste, it was repurposed for use in the new
building. Nearly all of the construction and demolition waste — 98 percent — was diverted
from the landfill, and 36 percent of the materials used were recycled.17
The Pacific Plaza project has been recognized with five prestigious awards already, and one
participant reported that additional awards are likely pending for 2011:
The National Association of Industrial and Office Properties (NAIOP) awarded Pacific
Plaza the 2010 National Sustainable Retrofit Project of the Year award, and the 2010
Adaptive Reuse of the Year award.
Absher Construction was awarded the State of Washington Green Building award for
this project from the Association of General Contractors.
1717

Pacific Plaza project description: http://www.cityoftacoma.org/Page.aspx?nid=905

16

The project also received the Ghillarducci Award in recognition for successful new
development & renovation by the Tacoma-Pierce County Chamber.
The City of Tacoma awarded the project the Commercial Revitalization Award in 2010.
Conclusions
The findings from this study of commercial retrofit employers suggest that shifting market
trends and evolving customer demand for sustainable retrofit projects means that the
knowledge and application of sustainable technologies and business practices will become
increasingly essential for the future of the commercial retrofit industry in Pierce County. At the
same time, client expectations and a growing recognition among these firms about the
importance of supporting sustainable principles and practices are also spurring the use of
sustainable practices internally.
It is important to note that none of the companies that participated in this project have yet
made the significant structural or organizational changes that might represent an ideal, fullydeveloped sustainable organization, as illustrated earlier in Figure 1. But the bulk of the
evidence from this study shows that each has taken important developmental steps towards
sustainability, such as crafting a new vision for the organization, sponsoring internal recycling,
implementing waste reduction programs in the office and on the worksite, and by investing in
education and training to enable employees to learn and apply sustainability principles and
techniques in their jobs and in the workplace. On a cautionary note, however, these firms
were identified by their peers and other industry observers as being leaders in developing and
using sustainable practices; this study does not account for the many firms in Pierce County for
whom sustainability is not currently a deliberate business strategy or organizational goal.
Some of the central conclusions of this study are summarized below:
Sustainability is good for business. The ability of commercial retrofit companies to provide
sustainable product and service options to clients is clearly valued as a marketing strategy, and
as important for new business development. Companies report that they anticipate that the
market for sustainable projects will grow, and having the ability to demonstrate the projected
benefits of different sustainable options helps meet a client’s interest in understanding the
potential cost-savings and broader benefits of a project before they invest. But firms that
market and promote sustainable options must also be prepared to deliver on the promise; the
ability to complete a project successfully and to demonstrate outcomes.
It may well be those companies and their suppliers/subcontractors who embrace and use
sustainable concepts internally are more likely to recognize the cost-benefit of these practices
than companies who simply provide the service. At the very least it would provide an

17

additional ‘marker’ that these firms can present to clients as evidence of their commitment to
sustainability.
Client expectations are changing the industry. While cost continues to be at the forefront of
their minds, employers report that clients are more frequently requesting projects that have
sustainable components and features. Indeed, for the firms included in this study the growing
emphasis on client expectations for both cost efficiency and sustainability were viewed as a
long-term trend, not as merely a short-term anomaly. Although clients typically focus on
project costs, the economic recession has created conditions that add to the challenges faced
by contractors and architects. As one participant stated, “Our clients want us to build
sustainably but for less money. That means we need to be smart and innovative in our work.”
The weak economy may also be contributing to client decisions to retrofit an existing structure
rather than to build anew. Regardless of the reasons driving new expectations, to the extent
that clients are requiring that retrofit projects include a larger proportion of sustainable
content, the firms that provide these products and services will need to adapt or they will be
limited in their ability to compete with firms that are responsive.
Commercial retrofit market is expanding. It is estimated that 75% of existing buildings
nationwide will be replaced or renovated in the next 25 years.18 According to one estimate, the
current market for commercial retrofits in the U.S. is about $6 billion per year; another
projection is that the market potential will grow to $180-190 billion over the next 10 years, or
roughly $18 billion annually.19
The Pierce County Economic Index reports that the outlook for commercial and industrial real
estate in 2011 is cautiously optimistic, but there are some overarching reasons why growth in
the retrofit market—and with it an increased emphasis on sustainability—seems likely.20 First,
Washington utilities continue to offer a range of financial incentives and tools to stimulate new
projects, and these incentives have helped drive up demand in the Puget Sound region. 21
Second, recent federal investments in energy efficiency have, for the short term, boosted the
availability of funds for commercial retrofit projects. Washington State has succeeded in
competing for a significant amount of federal stimulus funds for energy efficiency projects that
target retrofit projects. In 2009 and 2010, for example, the Puget Sound Region received $117.7

18

Anderson, Dale, By the Numbers: Creating Real Sustainability Savings, Business Examiner, January 31, 2011.
Frost and Sullivan (2008). North American Energy Management Services - Investment
Analysis. Report # N337-F1; see also: Hodum, R (2010). Efficiency boom: How commercial retrofits can power America’s
economic recovery, progressive policy institute (November): http://www.progressivefix.com/wpcontent/uploads/2010/11/11.2010PPI_Memo-Hodum-Efficiency_Boom.pdf; see also:, Commercial market size estimate, Pace
Now, http://pacenow.org/documents/Market%20Sizing%20Reference%20for%20NCEP%20PACE%20Mtg_2009May14.pdf
20
Goodman, D. and Mann, B. (2011) Pierce County Economic Index
19

21

Energy efficiency supply chain study (2010). Seattle, Berk & Associates, for the Workforce Development Council
of Seattle-King County (October).

18

million for green building and energy efficiency related activities. Retrofit firms who have the
skills and tools to build sustainably are well positioned to compete for these projects.
At the state level, the Department of Commerce and the Office of Superintendent of Public
Instruction received a total of $100 million of state funding for energy efficient school
retrofits.22 And, there continues to be political support for energy efficiency retrofits, although
the state’s fiscal crisis has precluded financial support for new projects. On the heels of the
federal funds, bills and a bond initiative aimed at directing additional state funding for retrofits
for schools and other public buildings were introduced during the last legislative session, but
the bond initiative was rejected by voters.23
Nationally, there is a continued conversation about the need for more investment in
commercial retrofit projects: On February 3, 2011, President Obama announced his new Better
Buildings Initiative. The goal is to make the countries’ commercial building space 20% more
efficient by the year 2020. It is predicted that this would result in a $40 billion dollars of savings
annually. Finally even though the region’s low energy costs and a relatively moderate climate
may moderate demand for building retrofits in the Puget Sound region somewhat, energy
demand and the cost of energy are both expected to rise over the long term.24 Thus, while the
building industry as a whole remains depressed, there are signs that the economy is improving.
And while the conditions needed to support additional growth in commercial retrofit projects
appears to be more stable than for new construction, it seems likely that regional businesses
that employ sustainable business practices may be in a stronger position to endure and respond
more readily to new business opportunities; indeed, there is some evidence that sustainable
businesses are weathering the economic recession better than most.25
More ROI data is needed. There is a need for specific data about maintenance and operations
savings that are the result of a sustainable retrofit project. Despite repeated requests for data
showing ROI, it was not made available. While one potential reason is that this information is
proprietary and companies are reluctant to release information regarding financial costs,
estimates and outcomes, another viable explanation is that systematic data regarding the
actual ROI of specific projects does not yet exist. In this study, most participants indicated that
their data collection was for a period of less than one year. Most participants indicated that at
least one full year, if not two years, of data needs to be collected before specific savings can be
calculated. Industry observers indicate that the public sector appears to be further along in
implementing sustainable building practices.
Although the scope of this study was limited, the technical and process issues surrounding the
definition, measurement and analyses of project data to estimate and confirm ROI is complex,
22

Commerce website showing state investments: http://www.commerce.wa.gov/site/1335/default.aspx
Referendum 52 (2010)
24
See: Northwest Power and Conservation Council Sixth Power Plan:
http://www.nwcouncil.org/energy/powerplan/6/default.htm
25
Schrag, Paul “Be Green: It Really is Easier than You Think” Business Examiner, January 31, 2011.
23

19

but it is also central to the ability of commercial retrofit firms and their partners to demonstrate
the various outcomes that are tied to the sustainable options that their clients invest in. As a
next step, if public-sector project data is more readily accessible than data maintained by
private firms or clients, it may be useful to conduct a targeted study to examine the process
used to estimate and confirm ROI outcomes for sustainably-designed projects, and to
investigate the extent to which those technologies are being diffused among private-sector
firms.
Potential Next Steps:
Conduct a national review of strategies and tools for determining ROI that are currently
being used or that are under development.
Identify the metrics that are being used to determine ROI on sustainably built projects in
the public sector. Since publicly funded buildings have required a LEED Silver standard
for several years, it is likely that they have more data collected and that data will be
made available to researchers since the data is not proprietary.
Use the identified metrics to develop a tool that others can use to determine the ROI on
their buildings and projects. This uniform measurement tool could be a specific
deliverable from the SEES Leadership group to the community.
Education and training is essential but problematic. The participants in this study generally
supported the provision of education and training needed to enable employees to acquire and
apply sustainability skills in their jobs. Often, however, between the pressures of meeting
existing work requirements and the costs associated with sending employees to workshops or
off the work-site for training, several employers expressed their frustration about their ability
to offer more training. As one study participant noted: “Most professionals don’t have time to
get out for training so they keep doing what they already know how to do in the ways they
already know how to do it.”
This problem of balancing the demands of existing work with the need to gain new skills is
paradoxical: the expanded focus on sustainability that these companies are attempting to drive
into the culture of their organizations, typically through the leadership of key executives or
other influential staff members, may be limited if employees are unable to acquire a deeper
knowledge about sustainability and the tools and practices needed to support this emerging
vision. By extension it seems reasonable to conclude that this condition is slowing down
momentum and constraining the ability of these companies to integrate sustainable business
practices within their own organizations.
The problem of balancing workload with the need for upgrade training is not new; these
pressures are evident in all industries and workplaces. And, it seems likely that the economic
20

recession has exacerbated this imbalance; several employers described how cutbacks and other
efforts to reduce costs have led to an “all hands on deck” environment where everyone is
working harder. But these problems are not intractable, especially as they relate to the
provision of workforce education.
As a next step, a targeted conversation between the participants and key regional education
and training providers may help to reveal the various options and new solutions available to
employers that can better meet their needs. Technology-enabled education delivery options
may help to reduce the costs associated with off-site training. Online delivery and other hybrid
online-laboratory training options have become increasingly popular among employers
precisely because they enable employees to remain on-site, learn about specific topics and
techniques that are most useful to them in their jobs, and to learn as time allows, rather than
on a fixed schedule.
Potential Action Plan:
Convene education partners, training providers and industry representatives in Pierce
County to focus on the following: identify specific training needs; catalog existing
training programs and potential gaps; discuss formats for delivering training; and
identify next steps.
Provide guidance and coordination to education and training providers as they develop
training to meet the needs identified by the industry partners.
In summary, the findings of this study underscore the notion that sustainability is an on-going
process, not an end state. The firms included in this study represent a select group of
employers who are working to expand their ability to offer sustainably designed options for
clients, while also attempting to drive sustainable principles into their own organizations. As
one employer noted, this can be a tall order that requires strong and persistent leadership:
“Sustainability takes a leader, takes a champion, takes time and takes effort”. Certainly
leadership is a necessary condition for driving a culture of sustainability throughout an
organization, and the evidence from this study suggests that progress has been made within
these Pierce County firms. The findings suggest that these companies are attuned to the
market potential for sustainable retrofit projects and they are adapting to client interest in
sustainable options. For Pierce County employers, the business prospects for the retrofit
industry appears promising, especially for firms that are responsive to client’s interest in
sustainable projects.
For many of the reasons described in this report, however, most firms have made fairly modest
progress in adopting sustainable business practices within their own organizations. This finding
probably reflects a developmental stage for these firms, with prospects for further growth in
21

the application of sustainable business practices. But it is important to note that the firms
included in the study comprise a select group that are probably more advanced in the adoption
of sustainable practices than their peers, and therefore the findings of this study also call for
additional research to collect Return On Investment data when it becomes available and to find
alternative ways to offer the training that will increase firms’ ability to compete in the
sustainable retrofit market of the future.

22

Appendix A
Interview Participants: Interview participants included company executives, engineers, project
managers and other professional-level staffs who were knowledgeable about the firm’s
sustainability projects and internal initiatives. The firms who participated in the study include
the following:
Absher Construction Company
LeROY Surveyors & Engineers
BCRA
Rushforth Construction Co.
McKinstry
City of Tacoma, Public Works Department
BLRB architects

23

Appendix B
Sample Sustainability Statement
STANDARD POLICIES AND PROCEDURES FOR SUSTAINABILITY
AND ENERGY EFFICIENCY
AND GREEN BUILDING PRACTICES

TABLE OF CONTENTS I.
I.
II.
III.

Company Sustainability
Energy Efficiency
Green Building Practices

I.

Sustainability:
a. ______ Co. Inc. is committed to minimizing the impact of the construction
business on the environment and encouraging sustainable practices within the
company.
b. Recycling
i. We will recycle the following frequently used materials in our office:
plastics, glass, aluminum, paper, and cardboard. Paper recycling bins are
located in each office and are placed next to all copiers. Co-mingled
containers are located in the kitchen and co-mingled bins are located
outside at the western corner at the back of the office. Pick up will be per
the local waste management company’s schedule.
ii. ________will hire waste management companies to dispose of comingled debris as specified locations for all construction debris. Pick up
will be per the local waste management company’s schedule.
iii. Used printer cartridges will be recycled in accordance with the
manufacturer’s recommendations. If return packaging is provided, this
method will be used. If no return packaging is provided, a monthly pick up
will be requested from the copier maintenance personnel.
iv. Binders, folders, padded envelops, boxes, etc will be reused whenever
possible. These items can be found in the supply storage room in the
main office. Jobsites are to return all unused or reusable products to the
main office for re-stocking.
v. All used phones and electronics will be returned to the IT department to
be recycled or donated to the local Office Depot or a local charity or may
be offered to employees for their home use if management deems
appropriate.
vi. Used motor oil used in company vehicles will be recycled by the vendor
currently being used for automotive repair. Other equipment requiring
motor oil will be recycled
c. Paper Usage
i. __________employees shall make efforts to minimize the general use of
office paper.
24

II.

ii. Distribute, file, and archive documents electronically. Do not print and file
documents or emails unless absolutely necessary for legal
documentation.
iii. Copy both sides of the paper with the two sided copy feature when
making copies for internal use whenever possible.
iv. Purchase recycled or managed growth forest paper such as that certified
through the FSC (Forest Stewardship Council).
v. Attempt to work with local printing services that use recycled or managed
growth paper and soy based inks.
d. Environment
i. Purchase office supplies from local companies whenever possible.
ii. Purchase and use washable, recyclable or biodegradable tableware in all
offices. Order through main office if necessary.
iii. Purchase and use non-toxic biodegradable cleaning products in all
offices.
iv. Clean or replace HVAC filters per recommended manufactures
instructions.
v. Provide safe clean drinking water for all employees.
vi. Maintain a reasonably clean workspace for all employees. Offices will be
cleaned once a week on a regularly scheduled basis to insure interior air
quality, prevent fire hazards and maintain the health of all employees.
Jobsite offices are an extension of the home office and should represent
________ in an appropriate manner.
Energy Efficiency
a. ___________has an overall goal of conserving energy and promoting efficiency
both within main offices and on individual jobsites.
b. Electricity Usage
i. Turn off all lights and electronics when not in use.
ii. Install compact fluorescent, LED or other long burning light bulbs
throughout offices.
iii. Use “Energy Star” rated office equipment or equivalent for all new
equipment or appliances leased or purchased.
iv. Reuse binders, folders, padded envelops, boxes, etc whenever possible.
Collect and return these products to the main office for reuse when they
become
c. Water Conservation
i. _________employees shall make efforts to minimize the general use of
potable water.
ii. Install low flow or waterless fixtures and motion sensor faucets when
replacing used ones in company bathroom facilities.
iii. Install aerators or flow restrictors on all office sinks.
d. HVAC Systems
i. Turn off or down all HVAC systems when offices are unoccupied.
ii. Purchase high efficiency HVAC equipment when replacing or upgrading
existing systems.
iii. Inspect and clean air ducts and both supply and return grilles on a regular
basis to minimize dust collection and mildew.
e. Transportation
i. Purchase or lease all future company vehicles with the lowest available
emissions standards of vehicles within their particular class.
25

III.

ii. Support and provide incentives for the practice of carpooling, biking or the
use of public transportation when commuting to and from work when
possible. Offer use of company owned vehicles on a reserve basis.
Green Building Practices
a. The policies and practices of ______ include incorporating into our projects
recognized green building practices as set forth by the USGBC, ABC Green
Contractors program and local state and federal legislation. This policy includes
the following goals: divert 50% of construction waste from landfills, purchase
10% (by cost) of construction materials regionally and purchase 10% (by cost) of
construction materials that include recycled materials.
b. Pre-Construction
i. Include subcontractor “boilerplate” language in contracts regarding
sustainable jobsite practices. Update current scopes to reflect the
company policies and goals.
ii. Include allowances for any necessary expenditure required to achieve the
goals set forth above.
iii. Assure that the education and training benchmarks set forth by the ABC
Green Contractors program are achieved.
c. During Construction
i. Post jobsite requirements outlining green initiatives at the jobsite and
review company policy with subcontractors during pre-construction
meetings.
ii. Maintain all sites in accordance with local EPA regulations and LEED
2009 SS: Prerequisite 1 regarding construction activity pollution
prevention.
iii. Divert construction debris from disposal in landfills and incinerators.
Provide separate containers onsite to recycle the following items:
cardboard, metal, brick, acoustical tile, concrete, plastic, glass, gypsum
wallboard, carpet and insulation.
iv. Encourage onsite recycling of consumer products use by subcontractors
by setting up basic collection facilities for plastic, glass and aluminum
cans.
v. Purchase contractor controlled construction materials that are
manufactured within 500 miles of the main office whenever the option is
available and cost effective.
vi. Purchase contractor controlled construction materials that include
recycled content whenever the option is available and cost effective.
vii. Reuse contractor controlled construction materials whenever possible
and cost effective. Store reusable materials at the warehouse facility for
future use on other projects.
d. Post Construction
i. Conduct a final review of the project with company green building
representative to determine feasibility, cost impact/savings, vendor
information subcontractor participation and necessary educational
requirements related to green building and sustainability.

26

