POLICIES & PROCEDURES
Title:

Protecting Confidentiality of Health Information

Page 1 of 12

Number:

Legal Policy L-2

Effective Date: 5/9/14

Applies To: All Employees, Interns, Contractors and Volunteers

Supersedes:

12/1/08

Approved: Scott Daniels, MS, RS, Administrator

Next Review: 5/9/17

A. Purpose
The purpose of this policy is to establish rules concerning the use and disclosure of Protected Health
Information (PHI) and other confidential health information. This policy provides procedures in
order to protect the confidentiality of health information for clients and employees, and establishes
processes for both clients and District staff to best assist clients in obtaining such access to comply
with the Public Records Act chapter RCW 42.56. The public is encouraged to access public records
available on our website, www.kitsappublichealth.org, before submitting a public records request.
B. Policy Statement
The Kitsap Public Health District (District) is committed to protecting the privacy of the Personal
Health Information (PHI) of its clients as required by the Health Insurance Portability and
Accountability Act of 1996 (HIPAA), and the implementing regulations which include the Standards
for the Privacy of Individually Identifiable Health Information (the “Privacy” Rule 45 C.F.R. Parts 160
and 164) and the Security Standards for the Protection of Electronic Protected Health Information
(the “Security” rule 45 C.F.R. Parts 160 and 164) as amended by applicable provisions of the Health
Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (Title XIII Subtitle D) and its
implementing regulations (the “HITECH” act), including the final rule issued on January 25, 2013,
that modified HIPAA Privacy, Security, Enforcement, and Breach Notification rules under HITECH.
This policy is not intended to interfere with client or employee access to his or her medical records.
It is intended, however, to restrict disclosure of protected health information as required for
treatment, payment, or healthcare operations; to other disclosures specifically authorized by the
client; or as required by law. Additionally, for the Environmental Health Division, many records are
considered public documents as set forth in Washington State’s Public Records Act, Chapter 42.56
RCW. The identity of persons filing complaints can be held confidential when certain conditions are
met as described in this policy/procedure.
C. Definitions
1. Breach: The same meaning given such term in 45 CFR § 164.402; a breach means the
unauthorized acquisition, access, use, or disclosure of PHI which compromises the security or
privacy of such information except where an unauthorized person to whom such information is
disclosed would not reasonably have been able to retain such information.
2. Business Associate: The same meaning given such term in 45 CFR § 160.103; a business
associate is an individual or entity other than a member of the District’s workforce that creates,
receives, maintains, or transmits PHI in either paper or electronic form to perform or assist an
activity on behalf of the District. Examples include legal, actuarial, accounting, consulting, data

5/9/14

KPHD Policy L-2: Protecting Confidentiality of Health Information

Page 2 of 12

aggregation, administrative, financial services or vendors providing “patient safety activities”
such as health information organizations, health record vendors, and vendors that facilitate data
transmission.
3. Electronic Protected Health Information (EPHI): Protected health information specifically in
electronic or digital form.
4. Privacy Rule: The implementing rules in the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
of 1996 (HIPAA), at 45 CFR parts 160 and 164, requiring covered entities to have in place
appropriate administrative, physical, and technical safeguards for protected health information
and to implement those safeguards.
5. Protected Health Information (PHI): Information in any form --- oral, aural, electronic, or
printed --- that identifies an individual and relates to his or her physical or mental health. PHI,
for the purpose of this policy, includes not only clients, but also employees when protected
health information is involved. Health information that has been edited to remove identifiers or
potentially identifying data or information is not PHI under this policy. PHI for a person who has
been dead more than 50 years is not protected.
6. Records: Documents either in paper or electronic form. Under Chapter 42.17 RCW, public
records refer to any writing containing information relating to the conduct of government or the
performance of any governmental or proprietary function prepared, owned, used, or retained
by any state or local agency regardless of physical form or characteristics.
7. Security Rule: The implementing rules in the Health Insurance Portability and Accountability Act
of 1996 (HIPAA) 45 CFR parts 160 and 164 developed to implement security safeguards to
protect electronic protected health information (EPHI) while permitting the appropriate access
and use of that information. Sets standards for ensuring that only those who should have access
to EPHI will have access by implementing appropriate administrative, technical, and physical
safeguards to protect the security of EPHI.
8. Unsecured PHI: PHI that has not been rendered unusable, unreadable, or indecipherable to
unauthorized individuals through the use of a technology or methodology to unauthorized
individuals.
D. Implementing Procedures: In General
1. Hybrid Entity
a. The District declares itself a “hybrid entity” whose business activities include both
covered and non-covered functions. The District designates most Community Health
Programs and Administrative Services Programs such as Accounting and Information
Technology as healthcare components according to CFR §164.504(c)(3)(iii). The District
excludes the Environmental Health Division as non-covered functions.
b. CFR §164.512(b)(1)(i) authorizes public health agencies to collect and receive
information for the purpose of preventing or controlling disease, disability, or injury
including public health surveillance, public health interventions, and public health
investigations. In these circumstances, the District may use or disclose PHI without the
written authorization of the individual.

5/9/14

KPHD Policy L-2: Protecting Confidentiality of Health Information

Page 3 of 12

c. Disclosure of PHI between the covered components and the non-covered components
must follow the guidelines outlined in this policy.
2. Training. The District will provide training on the requirements in this policy to all new
employees, contractors, interns, and volunteers and will provide annual training updates to
staff who work with records containing PHI. Training will provide an overview of key provisions
of the HIPAA act and terminology contained in the act as well as more detailed information
about handling PHI, PHI disclosures, and authorization requirements in a medical setting.
Training will be provided to all staff as necessary whenever there is a material change in the
District’s policies and procedures. All initial and ongoing training will be documented.
3. Formal Acknowledgment of Confidentiality. All employees, contractors, interns, and
volunteers will review and sign a Statement of Confidentiality (Attachment B) that is retained in
his/her personnel file. Violations of this confidentiality policy may result in disciplinary action.
Willful violations may result in disciplinary action up to and including immediate dismissal.
4. Business Associates
a. Business Associates such as auditors, accounting vendors, quality assurance assessors,
lawyers, transcriptionists, interpreters, consultants, janitorial workers, building
maintenance staff, building security staff, and vendors providing “patient security
services” must sign a District Business Associate agreement or such terms will be
incorporated into the body of the primary agreement. Entities that store PHI, in either
paper or electronic form, are considered to be Business Associates even if they do not
access, use, or disclose that information.
b. If the Business Associate is a government entity, the provisions of this policy may be met
by entering into a memorandum of understanding. Other Business Associates may
comply with the requirements of this policy by executing an amendment to an existing
contract or by signing a contract that demonstrates compliance with HIPAA and the
requirements in this policy.
c. A Business Associate arrangement does not exist between:
i. The District as a provider and other providers.
ii. The District and financial institutions.
iii. Entities that provide courier or transmission services such as the United States
Post Office or internet service providers.
d. Business Associates are directly liable for impermissible uses and disclosures of PHI to
include failure to provide breach notifications to the District; failing to disclose PHI to
HHS when required; failing to disclose PHI to the District or an individual whose PHI
information is at issue, if the individual has requested such information; failing to
comply with the minimum necessary standards, and failing to enter into Business
Associate agreements with subcontractors that create or receive the District’s PHI.
e. The contract may permit the Business Associate to use and disclose PHI and/or EPHI in
its capacity as a Business Associate to the District to the extent permitted by law.
Business Associates will limit the use, transmission, or disclosure of PHI to the minimum
necessary consistent with the District’s policies and procedures to perform its duties
and obligations under Agreement. The contract will require the Business Associate not
to further disclose PHI and/or EPHI other than as allowed by the contract or required by

5/9/14

KPHD Policy L-2: Protecting Confidentiality of Health Information

Page 4 of 12

law, use appropriate safeguards to prevent unauthorized use or disclosure of PHI and/or
EPHI, report to the District any unauthorized use or disclosure of PHI once it becomes
aware, and ensure that any agents including sub-contractors agree to the same
restrictions that apply to the Business Associate. The contract shall also require the
Business Associate, at the time the contract is terminated, to return or destroy any PHI
and/or EPHI in its possession or, if impractical, to extend or maintain the provisions of
the contract as long as the PHI and/or EPHI is retained.
f.

Subcontractors of Business Associates to whom the Business Associate delegates such
functions to a subcontractor that creates, receives, maintains, or transmits PHI are
themselves considered to be Business Associates of the District. The District is not
required to enter into a Business Associate agreement with a subcontractor of a
Business Associate; however, the Business Associate is required to have a Business
Associate agreement with its subcontractors.

g. Business Associates must cooperate with the District to provide access to PHI and/or
EPHI to allow for amendment or correction of the PHI and/or EPHI, and for accounting
PHI and/or EPHI disclosures.
h. Business Associates must make available to the District their internal practices, books,
and records at no charge relating to the use and disclosure of PHI and or EPHI available
to the District for purposes of determining that Business Associate is in compliance with
the requirements of its agreement with the District and the HIPAA rule.
i.

If the District becomes aware of a pattern of activity or practice by a Business Associate
that constitutes a material breach, the District shall take reasonable steps to cure the
breach or end the violation. If such steps are not successful, the District may elect to
terminate the contract or agreement.

5. Confidentiality. To the extent possible, District services and operations will be conducted in
such a way that only those who need to know can hear or see clients and providers when they
are directly sharing PHI.
6. Maintenance of Information. To safeguard against unauthorized access to records and data:
a. Documents containing PHI will be attended by a staff person or contained in a locked
area. These documents include medical records, billing forms, x-rays, lab reports, client
logs and mailed or faxed documents containing protected health information. Fax
machines used to transmit and receive PHI will be kept in a room that is in a restricted
area and locked at night.
b. Medical records and personnel files with PHI will be kept in locked files when not in use
and checked in and out for use using proper accountability procedures.
c. All medical clinic logs and quality assurance records will be retained in locked files or
restricted areas.
d. All telephone notes or other client logs not included in medical records or quality
assurance files will be disposed of in confidential refuse bins.
e. EPHI will be protected from unauthorized disclosure through staff adherence to District
policies on password protection, automatic locking of computers, and leaving

5/9/14

KPHD Policy L-2: Protecting Confidentiality of Health Information

Page 5 of 12

computers unattended. Staff will be prohibited from duplicating data files or removing
or transmitting data unless specifically authorized to do so. Additional information
technology security policies and procedures are contained in District Administrative
Policy A-1, “Information Technology Resources”.
f.

Records containing client information shall be stored and destroyed in a fashion
consistent with District records retention and information technology security policies.

g. The Health District mailroom is located at the Norm Dicks Government Center on a
locked secured floor to protect confidential mail and faxes stored there.
h. For incoming mail containing PHI, e.g., medical records, clerical staff will open and date
stamp the mail. Medical lab data reports will not be opened and date stamped by
clerical staff. Medical lab data reports will only be opened and date stamped by a clinic
manager or supervisor who will then be responsible for forwarding the data, as
appropriate.
7. Use of Text Messaging and Social Media. District staff may use text messaging and social
media, such as Facebook, to contact clients with appointment reminders under limited
circumstances when it is not possible to contact a client through more conventional means,
such as voicemail. It is necessary to obtain a client’s consent for text messaging and for leaving
messages on voicemail. Since text messages and social media are not confidential, staff must
follow minimum necessary HIPAA standards for leaving information: appointment time and
clinic phone number without stating the reason for the appointment or the name of the clinic,
clinician, or information that would identify the client such as the client’s name or date of birth.
8. Disclosure of Protected Health Information Without Authorization
a. The District may use or disclose PHI to provide treatment, for payment, or for
healthcare operations in compliance with the District’s Notice of Privacy Practices,
Disclosure of PHI is on a “need to know” basis: only the minimum necessary information
to accomplish treatment, payment, or healthcare operations on behalf of the client or
District shall be disclosed.
b. Disclosure of PHI for treatment, for payment, or for healthcare operations does not
need to be documented in the medical record for disclosure accounting purposes.
c. PHI may also be disclosed without authorization for specific legal, administrative, or
emergency reasons as listed in Attachment A at the end of this policy.
9. Disclosures of PHI that Require Authorization
a. Specific authorization from the client shall be required for disclosure other than for
purposes of treatment, payment, or healthcare operations. Staff must verify the
identity of the requestor and confirm the authorization of the entity requesting release
of the PHI to receive it before releasing it.
b. After verifying the identity of the requestor and confirming the authorization of the
entity requesting release of the PHI to receive it, disclose only the minimum necessary
information.

5/9/14

KPHD Policy L-2: Protecting Confidentiality of Health Information

Page 6 of 12

c. The identity of the person requesting the disclosure of PHI must be verified. For
example, clients who call for PHI over the telephone (such as when requesting a test
result) must identify themselves by providing their date of birth or confirming their
address. Compare the signature on a records transfer request with a known sample of
the client’s signature from the chart. When external providers, such as another medical
provider, request PHI without written authorization from the client, such as when
confirming date of last visit or confirming medication prescribed, the client’s verbal or
written permission to release the PHI must be received prior to releasing the PHI to the
provider. Confirm the provider’s telephone number independently using a directory
and call the provider back before releasing PHI.
d. The District will follow records release guidelines contained in RCW 70.02 and WAC 246100-016(2) where such guidelines are more restrictive than HIPAA guidelines. Staff will
be trained on how to comply with these regulations for release of PHI.
e. Marketing and Fundraising. The District does not engage in activities where it receives
financial remuneration in exchange for the use or disclosure of PHI for marketing or
fundraising purposes.
f.

Sale of PHI. The District does not disclose PHI where the District would directly or
indirectly receive financial or non-financial payment from or on behalf of the recipient
of the PHI in exchange for the PHI.

g. Research. Before individually identifiable PHI may be used for research, the individual
whose PHI will be used must provide signed written permission to the District for such
use.
h. Psychotherapy Notes. Written authorization is required for the release of
psychotherapy notes.
i.

Deceased Persons. PHI of deceased persons is protected for fifty (50) years after death.
During that period, the decedent’s personal representative will be required to sign the
authorization for disclosure of the decedent’s health records. (See District policy A-30
Records Management for information about the District’s records retention policy.)

j.

Genetic Information. Genetic information may not be disclosed for underwriting
purposes pursuant to the Genetic Information Nondiscrimination Act (GINA).

10. Disclosure of Records of Minors
a. Minors 13 years of age or over may consent to care regarding their sexuality without
parental consent. A minor patient’s signature is required for the release of PHI (refer to
RCW chapter 70.24.110 and Washington Supreme Court decision State v. Koome, 84
Wn.2d 901 (1975).
b. Parents of children age 13 and under may request release of their child’s record by
signing the appropriate release.
c. PHI for legally emancipated minors may not be released without the minor’s signature.

5/9/14

KPHD Policy L-2: Protecting Confidentiality of Health Information

Page 7 of 12

11. Correctional Facilities
a. The medical units of correctional facilities are covered entities.
b. Inmates do not have the right to receive the Notice of Privacy Practices while the inmate
is in the custody of the correctional facility.
c. Staff providing care for inmates may disclose PHI if necessary to:
i.
ii.
iii.
iv.
v.
vi.

Provide health care to the inmate;
Protect the health and safety of the inmate or other inmates;
Protect the health and safety of officers or other employees of the
correctional facility;
Protect the health and safety of officers or employees of this or other
correctional facilities during transport of the inmate;
Provide law enforcement in the correctional facility; and
Provide for the administration, safety, and good order of the correctional
facility.

d. Once the inmate is no longer in custody or is released on probation, parole, or
supervised release, these provisions no longer apply.
12. Accounting of Authorized PHI Disclosures. PHI disclosures other than for treatment, payment,
or healthcare operations will be recorded in the medical record including the date of
disclosure, what protected healthcare information was disclosed, to whom it was disclosed,
how it was disclosed, and the name of staff processing the disclosure.
13. Client Rights
a. Right to inspect and receive copies. Clients have the right to request to inspect or
receive a copy of their PHI. We have 30 days from the date of the request to comply. If
necessary, we may request a 30-day extension for a maximum of 60 days. The request
must be made in writing and shall be retained in the client’s file. We may charge a
reasonable fee to cover the cost of copying, labor, and postage. Clients that wish to
inspect their record will be taken to a private area during the review and will be
accompanied at all times by a staff member. The inspection will be noted in the record
including date and signature of accompanying staff.
b. We may deny the request for covered reasons. If we deny the request, the client has
the right to have the denial reviewed.
c. Right to request nondisclosure to health plans for items or services that are self-paid:
You have the right to request in writing that healthcare items or services that you have
paid for in full in advance of your visit not be disclosed to your health plan.
d. Electronic Copy of PHI. Clients have the right to request to request access to their own
PHI maintained in a designated record set in electronic form. In the event that the PHI
cannot be provided in the requested format or the client declines electronic format, the
District can comply with the request for an electronic copy by providing a paper copy of
the PHI.

5/9/14

KPHD Policy L-2: Protecting Confidentiality of Health Information

Page 8 of 12

e. Right to Request Restricted Access. Clients have the right to request a restriction on
the use of their PHI; however, the District may deny the request.
f.

Amendment of PHI. Clients may request to amend their PHI if they believe information
in the record is erroneous or incomplete. This request must be made in writing and
provide a reason for the request. We have 60 days from the date of the request to
comply.
i.

ii.
iii.

If we deny the request, we must inform the client in writing and explain why
we are denied the request. The client may submit a written statement
disagreeing with our denial. The written statement of disagreement is filed in
the client’s medical record.
The PHI amendment must identify the records that are affected by the
amendment.
Requests for name changes must be made in writing and include a signature
with both the old and new names. The date, details of the name change, and
staff who processed the request will document the change in the chart.

g. Right to know about PHI disclosures. Clients have the right to request an accounting of
the times we have disclosed their PHI. A client has the right to receive a list once per
year without charge, as required by the Act. A reasonable fee for copying and mailing
may be charged for more frequent requests. A client request for PHI accounting must
be in writing and should be referred to the District’s HIPAA contact person for
processing. We must respond to a request for a PHI accounting within 60 days from the
date of the request.
h. Right to receive confidential communications. Clients have the right to request that
the District communicates with them in a particular way or location. For example, a
client may request that they be contacted only by mail or only at work.
14. Records Needed for Fieldwork
a. Charts or other medical information that need to be transported will be placed in a
secure container and transported directly from one site to another.
b. Records or devices containing records such as computers taken to the field will be
checked in and out on a log using proper accountability procedures.
c. Field records not returned to District premises overnight will be retained in a secure
locked transport bag or box in a locked vehicle or residence.
15. Notice of Privacy Practices. Clients must be offered a copy of the District’s Notice of Privacy
Practices at the time of the first visit. Clients acknowledge receipt of the Notice of Privacy
Practices by signing and dating the signature page. The signature page is kept in the client’s
medical record. If a client refuses to sign the Notice, a staff person will note the client’s name,
note that the client refused to sign the Notice, date the form, and sign the form. Refusing to
sign the Notice of Privacy Practices does not prevent the District from using or disclosing PHI as
provided by the HIPAA Privacy Rule or Washington State law.
The Notice of Privacy Practice is made available to anyone who requests a copy and is posted
on the District’s website.

5/9/14

KPHD Policy L-2: Protecting Confidentiality of Health Information

Page 9 of 12

16. Breach
a. A breach is the unauthorized acquisition, access, use, or disclosure of PHI which
compromises the security or privacy of such information, except where an unauthorized
person to whom such information is disclosed would not reasonably have been able to
retain such information.
b. Exceptions. The term ‘breach’ does not include:
i.

ii.

iii.

Any unintentional acquisition, access, or use of PHI by an employee or
individual acting under the authority of the District or Business Associate if (1)
such acquisition, access, or use was made in good faith and within the course
and scope of employment or other professional relationship of such employee
or individual acting under the authority of a covered entity or business
associate; and (2) such information is not further acquired, accessed, used, or
disclosed by any person;
Any inadvertent disclosure from an individual who is otherwise authorized to
access PHI at a facility operated by District or Business Associate to another
similarly situated individual at same facility; and
Any such information received as a result of such disclosure is not further
acquired, accessed, used, or disclosed without authorization by any person.

17. Breach Notification
a. Staff who become aware of a deliberate or inadvertent wrongful disclosure of PHI
committed by themselves or another employee must report such violations promptly to
their immediate supervisor and the District’s Privacy Officer.
b. Staff that report violations in good faith are protected by the District’s Whistleblower
Protection Policy (Legal Policy L-1).
c. Risk Assessment. Upon receiving a breach notification, the District’s Privacy Officer will
conduct a risk assessment to determine the extent of the breach and probability that
the PHI was compromised. At the conclusion of the internal investigation, the Privacy
Officer will prepare a formal report of the findings. The Privacy Officer will take steps to
ensure compliance with HIPAA regulations in the future including, if necessary,
implementing changes to policies and procedures to mitigate the effects of improper
disclosure.
d. The Privacy Officer is required to provide notification of the breach to affected
individuals, the Secretary, and, in certain circumstances, to the media.
e. Individual Notice. Notification to individuals must be in written form delivered by firstclass mail. If the District has insufficient or out-of-date contact information for 10 or
more individuals, the District must provide substitute notice by either posting the notice
on the home page of its website or by providing the notice in major print or broadcast
media where the affected individuals likely reside. If the District has insufficient or outof-date contact information for fewer than 10 individuals, the District may provide
substitute notice by an alternative form of written, telephone, or other means.
Substitute notices must include a toll-free number for individuals to use to determine if
their PHI was involved in the breach.

5/9/14

KPHD Policy L-2: Protecting Confidentiality of Health Information

Page 10 of 12

Individual notices must be provided without unreasonable delay and in no case later
than 60 days following the discovery of the breach. The notification must include, to the
extent possible, a description of the breach; a description of the types of information
that were involved in the breach; the steps affected individuals should take to protect
themselves from potential harm; and a brief description of what the District is doing to
investigate the breach, mitigate the harm, prevent further breaches, including contact
information for the District.
f.

Media Notice. In breaches affecting more than 500 residents, in addition to notifying
the affected individuals, the District is required to provide notice to prominent media
outlets serving Kitsap County. Media notification must be provided without
unreasonable delay and no later than 60 days after discovery of the breach.

g. Notice to the Secretary. The District will notify the Secretary of breaches of unsecured
PHI by completing the breach report form on the HHS website. For a breach affecting
500 or more people, the breach must be reported no later than 60 days after discovery
of the breach. Otherwise the District may notify the Secretary of any breaches on an
annual basis no later than 60 days after the close of the calendar year in which the
breach occurred.
h. Business Associates. Business Associates are required to notify the District of a breach
no later than 60 days following discovery of the breach. To the extent possible, the
Business Associate should provide the District with the identity(ies) of the individual(s)
affected as well as any information required to be provided by the District in its
notification.
18. Questions and Complaints
a. Clients with questions and complaints may contact the District’s Privacy Officer.
b. Clients who feel the District has violated their privacy rights may file a verbal or written
complaint with the District’s Privacy Officer.
c. Upon receiving a complaint, the contact person and the program manager will begin an
internal investigation to determine the facts of the complaint by reviewing documents
and interviewing witnesses. Upon conclusion of the investigation, the contact person
and program manager will prepare a formal report of the findings. The Privacy Officer
shall review the report prior to filing. The Privacy Officer shall retain such reports in a
confidential HIPAA complaint file.
d. Upon completion of the investigation and the filing of the report, the contact person will
contact the client to report the findings. Any response from the client will be retained in
the HIPAA complaint file with the investigation report.
e. Clients may also file a complaint with the Secretary of the U.S. Department of Health
and Human Services.
f.

The District will not retaliate against a patient when a complaint is filed.

19. Changes to Policies and Procedures. The District reserves the right to change its policies and
procedures at any time consistent with HIPAA and other applicable laws and regulations.

5/9/14

KPHD Policy L-2: Protecting Confidentiality of Health Information

Page 11 of 12

E. Implementing Procedures: HIPAA Security Rule
1. Requirements
a. Development of Security Procedures. The Privacy Officer is responsible for the
development and implementation of policies and procedures for appropriate security
safeguards necessary to protect EPHI that the District creates, receives, maintains, or
transmits.
b. Emergencies and Other Occurrences. The Privacy Officer is responsible for the
development and implementation of policies and procedures to protect EPHI against
any reasonably anticipated threats or hazards, such as natural disasters, vandalism, or
fire.
c. Compliance. The Privacy Officer is responsible for ensuring compliance by the District’s
workforce with the requirements of this policy, including establishing training and
auditing procedures.
2. Building Access and Security Controls. Facility access necessary to protect PHI is addressed in
Administrative Policy A-21, Building Access and Security.
3. Information Technology Security. Information technology security procedures are addressed
in Administrative Policy A-1, Information Technology Resources.
4. Security Incident Procedure. If time permits and if there is no immediate danger, employees
who leave their normal work area during an emergency should:
a. File sensitive documents in a secure location.
b. Close programs that contain EPHI.
c. Disconnect electrical equipment including desktop and laptop computers.
E. Implementing Procedures: Complaint Records in Environmental Health
1. Maintenance of Information. Information revealing the identity of persons who file
complaints with the District is exempt from public inspection and copying if 1) disclosure would
endanger the person’s life, physical safety, or property, or 2) the person, at the time of filing
the complaint, indicates a desire for nondisclosure. Efforts to ensure confidentiality will
include, but not be limited to, the following:
a. All complaint records shall be stored in a manner assuring privacy and affording
reasonable barriers to access by the public, press, or employees without the “need to
know.”
b. Records containing complainant information shall be stored and destroyed in a fashion
consistent with District records retention and information technology security policies.
c. Complaint records shall remain the property of the District.

5/9/14

KPHD Policy L-2: Protecting Confidentiality of Health Information

Page 12 of 12

d. Information from complaint records identifying the complainant shall not be released
without the consent of the complainant (parent or legal guardian - where applicable for
minors) in accordance with the following:
i.

Complaint forms shall include a block on the form indicating whether the
complainant desires disclosure or nondisclosure of his or her identity. If the
complainant does not indicate this desire to the District employee receiving
the complaint, the employee shall affirmatively ask a question regarding
disclosure or nondisclosure before completing the form. To avoid the
appearance of bias toward disclosure or nondisclosure, the employee shall
give the complainant the option to choose either disclosure or nondisclosure.
Anytime the identity of a complainant is requested, the employee shall
consult with a manager or supervisor prior to proceeding with a course of
action.
For any previous complaints where the identity of the complainant is
requested, and the complainant did not indicate a desire for disclosure or
nondisclosure at the time the complaint was filed, the District will resolve
these requests on a case-by-case basis. The employee shall consult with a
manager or supervisor should this occur.

ii.

iii.

e. Communications and documentation from the Kitsap Public Prosecuting Attorney’s
Office that are identified as “attorney-client privileged” shall be considered confidential
and shall not be filed as a public record. Confidential communications and
documentation shall be filed or stored separately from the main program files.
2. Examination and Copying of Records. The District must respond to any request for a public
record within five business days by producing the record, denying the request, or providing a
reasonable estimate of the additional time necessary to respond to the request.
3. Employee Acknowledgment. All employees, contractors, interns, and volunteers will review
and sign a Statement of Confidentiality that is retained in his/her personnel file. Violations of
this confidentiality policy may result in disciplinary action; willful violations may result in
disciplinary action up to and including immediate dismissal. A copy of the District’s Statement
of Confidentiality form is attached.
4. Training. Information about this subsection of the policy/procedure will be discussed during
employee orientation and reviewed annually. Training will also be provided to all staff as
necessary whenever a material change in this subsection of the policy/procedure is made.
F. Policy Review History
Initial Approval
Revised
Reviewed

4/8/03
1/4/06, 12/1/08, 5/9/14
N/A

KPHD Policy L-2: Protecting Confidentiality of Health Information
Attachment A
State and Federal Law Permits or Requires Disclosure of Protected Health Information Without
Patient Authorization Under the Following Conditions:
DISCLOSED TO:

FOR PURPOSE OF:

MAY BE DISCLOSED BY:

Public health authority (local,
state or federal)

Preventing or controlling disease or
serious harm to people

Persons who may have been
exposed to certain
communicable diseases

Preventing or controlling communicable
disease

Member of
communicable disease
team or designee
Member of
communicable disease
team or designee

Child Protective Services

Preventing child abuse or neglect

Any staff member

Adult Protective Services

Preventing abuse or neglect of vulnerable
adults
Preventing abuse or serious harm to the
individual or other potential victim, when
an immediate enforcement activity
depends upon disclosure and would be
adversely affected by waiting until the
individual is able to agree to the
disclosure

Any staff member

Law enforcement authority





Health Officer
Member of
Management Team
Prosecuting Attorney

Reporting crimes
Other law enforcement purposes
including identification and location of
people, identification of a crime victim,
or about decedents for investigation of
deaths
Responding to an order of a court, or in
response to a subpoena, discovery
request, or other lawful process

 Program Manager or
designee
 Prosecuting Attorney

Coroners, medical examiners
and funeral directors

About decedents for investigation of
deaths

Vital Records Registrar or
any Deputy Registrar

Public Human Resources
representatives

Processing worker accident or injury
reports and / or Workers’ Compensation
claims
Schools documenting immunization
status or to healthcare provider giving
ongoing immunization series to individual
For disaster relief purposes

Any supervisory /
management staff

Legal authority

Schools or Healthcare
Providers
Authorized public or private
disaster relief entities
Military and authorized
federal officials

For national security and intelligence
purposes

Member of immunization
team or designee
Any supervisory /
management staff or
designee
Health Officer

